-1-
the
n
Considerations for implementing and adjusting public
health and social measures in the context of COVID-19
Interim guidance
14 June 2021
Key Messages
• Public health and social measures (PHSM) have proven critical to limiting transmission of COVID-19 and reducing 
deaths.
• The decision to introduce, adapt or lift PHSM should be based primarily on a situational assessment of the intensity of 
transmission and the capacity of the health system to respond, but must also be considered in light of the effects these 
measures may have on the general welfare of society and individuals.
• Indicators and suggested thresholds are provided to gauge both the intensity of transmission and the capacity of the 
health system to respond; taken together, these provide a basis for guiding the adjustment of PHSM. Measures are 
indicative and need to be tailored to local contexts.
• PHSM must be continuously adjusted to the intensity of transmission and capacity of the health system in a country and 
at sub-national levels.
• When PHSM are adjusted, communities should be fully consulted and engaged before changes are made.
• In settings where robust PHSMs are otherwise in place to control the spread of SARS-CoV-2, allowing the relaxation 
of some measures for individuals with natural or vaccine-induced immunity may contribute to limiting the economic 
and social hardship of control measures. Applying such individualized public health measures must take into account a 
number of ethical and technical considerations.
Introduction
Public health and social measures (PHSMs) are being implemented across the globe to suppress SARS-CoV-2 transmission and
reduce mortality and morbidity from COVID-19.1 PHSMs include personal protective measures (e.g. physical distancing, 
avoiding crowded settings, hand hygiene, respiratory etiquette, mask-wearing); environmental measures (e.g. cleaning, 
disinfection, ventilation); surveillance and response measures (e.g. testing, genetic sequencing, contact tracing, isolation, and 
quarantine); physical distancing measures (e.g. regulating the number and flow of people attending gatherings, maintaining 
distance in public or workplaces, domestic movement restrictions); and international travel-related measures. In this context, it 
does not include medical countermeasures such as drug administration or vaccination. PHSMs act in concert, and a combination 
of measures is required to ensure adequate control. Measures should be implemented by the lowest administrative level for which 
situational assessment is possible and tailored to local settings and conditions.
Several important developments have occurred since the publication of the previous Considerations for implementing and 
adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19.
2 First, several COVID-19 vaccines have been approved 
by national regulatory authorities and through WHO Emergency Use Listing (EUL).
3 Vaccination has begun in most countries, 
bringing the prospect of significantly reducing severe disease and mortality further. Initial observational studies following rollout 
of vaccines suggest that vaccines may lead to protection against infection and a reduction in transmission,4–6 which in addition 
to PHSMs will help control the spread of the virus. Second, four WHO-classified variants of concern (VOCs) have emerged 
since December 2020,7,8 which are more transmissible and some of which may cause more severe disease9 and/or lead to a degree 
of vaccine escape, requiring potential adjustments to response measures to account for their different characteristics, including 
their impact on vaccine effectiveness. Several other variants of interest (VOIs) are also being monitored. Finally, more evidence 
is now available on the effectiveness of a range of individual and community-level measures (outlined in Table 3 below).
Control of SARS-CoV-2 will depend on: i) the prevalence of infection and of circulating variants; ii) the rate of growth or decline
in incidence; iii) the types, use of and adherence to control measures in place; iv) the speed with which vaccination occurs; v) 
the targeting and uptake of the vaccines among high-risk groups; and vi) vaccine effectiveness and natural immunity in the 
population.
10 National vaccination strategies should prioritize older individuals at highest risk of severe outcomes and health 
workers, to rapidly reduce mortality and the burden of disease and protect health care services. However, with successful 
COVID-19 vaccination of older populations following the prioritization of vulnerable groups, the virus may continue to spread 
among unvaccinated younger population groups.
11 After achieving high vaccination coverage of SAGE priority groups for stage
Considerations for implementing and adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance
-2-
I and stage II (as outlined in the WHO SAGE Roadmap For Prioritizing Uses of COVID-19 Vaccines in the Context of Limited 
Supply)12 across all countries, accelerating vaccination of other priority groups will be required to lower the infection rate,
especially in areas of high population density.
13
While vaccination is underway, PHSMs will need to continue to be implemented, in a tailored and agile way, particularly 
considering uncertainty in vaccine performance against known and potentially emerging VOCs and limited sequencing capacity 
to detect variants worldwide.
14 Moreover, significant inequities in global vaccine access mean that, globally, control of disease 
will continue to rely on PHSM for the foreseeable future, modulated by different levels of vaccination. Implementation of stricter
PHSMs, however, needs to be balanced against their socio-economic impacts, especially in settings with high dependence on 
daily wages and informal economy. Decisions to tighten, loosen, or introduce PHSMs to control COVID-19 must be weighed 
against the positive and negative impacts these measures have on societies and individuals. Considerations include impacts on 
health, economy, security, mental health, and psychosocial wellbeing, human rights, food security, socioeconomic disparities,
continuity of other public health programmes, treatment and management of medical conditions other than COVID-19 and 
gender-based violence. Other important considerations include vaccine acceptance and uptake, confidence, trust, motivational 
elements to get vaccinated and public sentiment and adherence to PHSMs. The overall health and wellbeing of communities 
should therefore be at the forefront of considerations when deciding on and adjusting PHSMs.
As the pandemic continues to evolve, PHSMs should be regularly reviewed and adjusted according to the local epidemiology. 
This requires agile decision-making based on ongoing situational assessments at the most local administrative level possible in 
a coherent and coordinated manner with neighbouring areas at the sub-national and national levels. Such assessments should be 
based on available data and take a risk/benefit approach considering the local epidemiology, the health system’s capacity to 
respond and other contextual considerations (such as upcoming mass gathering events that may alter transmission or capacity). 
Epidemiological indicators and their thresholds will depend on a country’s testing and surveillance strategies and capacities, data 
collection capacity, vaccination strategy and coverage and the overall COVID-19 response strategy. In settings where COVID19 surveillance or testing capacities are limited, it is important to identify and utilize additional indicators on morbidity, mortality 
and pressure on the health system, such as bed occupancy for both regular hospital beds and ICU beds, to complement available 
epidemiological data
This document provides guidance to help Member States assess the situation at national and sub-national levels, as well as key 
recommendations about the implementation of PHSMs. It should be read in conjunction with WHO interim guidance documents
on Critical preparedness, readiness and response actions for COVID-191 and Considerations for implementing a risk-based 
approach to international travel in the context of COVID-1915,16,which address several other elements of preparedness, readiness 
and response for COVID-19 beyond PHSMs.
This guidance document is intended for public health and health services decision-makers at all levels at which decisions about 
tailored PHSMs are made and technical actors involved in relevant sectors (e.g. community engagement, education, social 
services) supporting or impacted by PHSMs.
The guidance will be updated as our knowledge evolves, in particular in relation to the impact of VOCs on vaccine-induced and 
natural immunity, the impact of various COVID-19 vaccines on transmission and the impact of PHSMs on VOCs.
Changes from the previous version
This updated guidance provides updates on the assessment framework that drives decision-making for PHSMs, particularly on 
the type of indicators and the thresholds in different epidemiological settings, and in the context of vaccine roll-out and circulation 
of VOCs.
It also contains a new section on considerations for individualized public health measures based on a person’s SARS-CoV-2 
immunity status following COVID-19 vaccination or past infection in the context of contact tracing, international travel, and 
private social gatherings.
Recently published WHO scientific briefs and guidance were reviewed and key findings were summarised in Table 3. For the 
evidence on COVID-19 natural immunity, the document is based on the latest WHO scientific brief on COVID-19 natural 
immunity. 17 For the evidence of vaccines effectiveness, the document relies on the following published work: SAGE working 
groups Annexes to WHO interim recommendations for use of the COVID-19 vaccine BIBP: GRADE and Evidence to 
Recommendations18; Annexes to the interim recommendations for use of theChAdOx1-S [recombinant] vaccine against COVID19 (AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine AZD1222, SII Covishield, SK Bioscience)19; and Background document on the mRNA-1273 
vaccine (Moderna) against COVID-19.
20
Considerations for implementing and adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance
-3-
Transmission scenarios
Knowing the level of transmission is key to assessing the overall COVID-19 situation in a given area and guiding decisions on 
response activities and tailoring epidemic control measures.1
The community transmission (CT) classification is divided into four levels, as shown below. These definitions are abbreviated; 
details about the transmission classifications can be found in the Annex to this guidance.
• No (active) cases
• Imported / Sporadic cases
• Clusters of cases
• CT1: Low incidence of locally acquired widely dispersed cases detected in the past 14 days
• CT2: Moderate incidence of locally acquired widely dispersed cases detected in the past 14 days
• CT3: High incidence of locally acquired widely dispersed cases in the past 14 days
• CT4: Very high incidence of locally acquired widely dispersed cases in the past 14 days.
The transmission level classification for a geographic area may improve or worsen over time, and different geographic areas 
within a country will likely experience different levels of transmission concurrently. In settings with limited surveillance and 
diagnostic capacities, additional indicators – such as influenza-like-illness (ILI) / severe acute respiratory infection (SARI), allcause excess mortality trends and all-cause hospitalization rates – should be identified to complement information on COVID19 cases and deaths. These indicators are meant to capture pressure on the health care system and outcomes from undiagnosed 
COVID-19 cases and can support assessment of local transmission levels when triangulated with COVID-19 epidemiological 
data.
The process for determining transmission classification is outlined in the Annex to this document.
Health system response capacity
In addition to assessing the level of transmission, it is also necessary to understand the health system response capacity.
Depending on whether there is adequate, moderate or limited capacity, the same level of transmission can result in a drastically 
different situations and require a different degree of PHSMs. For the purpose of this document, ‘response capacity’ encompasses 
both health and public health services, including COVID-19 vaccination, and is measured in terms of both the actual ability to 
deliver services and the performance of those services.
Situational assessment using transmission level and response capacity
Whether or not vaccination has begun, countries should continue to monitor transmission level and 
take measures as needed.
Where there is a high level of vaccine-acquired immunity among prioritized groups, the epidemiology may start to change. A
decoupling may occur between incidence and hospitalization and/or death rates because individuals most prone to hospitalization 
and death will have been immunized. In this situation, a greater proportion of cases will occur among younger, less vulnerable 
population groups. Here, recalibrating the incidence thresholds, focusing on hospitalization and ICU rates and analyzing 
incidence data by age group – as well as assessing the potential caseload of undiagnosed COVID-19 cases – are essential to 
guiding the adjustment of PHSMs.
As new variants of concern emerge, PHSMs may need to be adapted in the presence of variants that may be more transmissible, 
cause more severe disease and/or evade immunity induced by vaccination and/or natural infection. All epidemiological and 
health system indicators should be followed closely and PHSMs applied according to the prevailing epidemiological and health 
system situation. A greater disease transmissibility (as for all currently identified VOCs) may require keeping PHSMs in place
for a longer period or may require intensifying the implementation of existing PHSMs to maintain effects on transmission. 
Based on the joint assessment of the transmission scenario and the health system response capacity – which will inform whether 
and how to adjust PHSMs – a situational level should be assigned to a geographic area (see Table 1). The assessment should 
rigorously and comprehensively examine quantitative and qualitative information from multiple sources, which should be 
triangulated to provide an additional reality check on the assessed situational level. The resultant situational levels should only 
be considered indicative, because they may not correspond well to the response required in a specific context and to the COVID19 control objectives of the country. For example, in a small country with limited capacity or remote areas with limited access 
to health services, stringent PHSMs may be warranted in the context of a relatively low level of transmission.
Considerations for implementing and adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance
-4-
Table 1: Situational level assessment matrix using transmission level and response capacity indicators to guide 
adjustment of PHSMs
Response capacity*
Transmission level* Adequate Moderate Limited
No cases 0 0 1
Imported/Sporadic cases 0 1 1
Clusters of cases 1 1 2
• Community - CT1 1 2 2
• Community - CT2 2 2 3
• Community - CT3 2 3 3
• Community - CT4 3 3 4
*Please refer to the Annex for transmission level definitions.
• Situational Level 0 corresponds to a situation with no known transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in the preceding 28 days. 
The health system and public health authorities are ready to respond, but there are no significant domestic measures in 
place and thus no significant restrictions on daily activities.
• Situational Level 1 is a situation where basic measures are in place to prevent transmission; or if cases are already 
present, the epidemic is being controlled through effective measures around the cases, with limited and transient
localized disruption of social and economic life.
• Situational Level 2 represents a situation with low community incidence or risk of community transmission beyond 
clusters. Additional measures may be required to control transmission; however, disruptions to social and economic 
activities can still be limited. In the context of vaccination, Situational Level 2 may also include areas with moderate 
levels of community transmission, but limited health service impact given adequate vaccination coverage in at-risk and 
older age groups.
• Situational Level 3 is a situation of community transmission with limited additional capacity to respond and a risk of 
health services becoming overwhelmed. A larger combination of measures may need to be put in place to limit 
transmission, manage cases, and ensure epidemic control.
• Situational Level 4 corresponds to an uncontrolled epidemic with limited or no additional health system response 
capacity available, thus requiring extensive measures to avoid overwhelming of health services and substantial excess 
morbidity and mortality.
Adjusting public health and social measures
Key principles
Decisions on which measures to implement, lift or strengthen, and the order in which these measures should be implemented,
should be based on the following guiding principles:
• Measures with the highest level of acceptability and feasibility and proven effectiveness – and which minimize the 
negative consequences on health and wellbeing of all members of society and the economy and – should be adopted, 
using the COVID-19 Global Risk Communication and Community Engagement Strategy – interim guidance.21
Acceptability and feasibility should be determined through participatory approaches and shift away from directives and 
one‑way communications. Engaging with the community for this assessment will help to maximize the likelihood of 
adherence. Effectiveness and potential negative effects of PHSMs should be evaluated through an evidence-based
assessment (e.g. literature review, WHO guidance, etc.) and active monitoring of the impact of implemented PHSMs.
• Additional measures should be considered as soon as the situational level rises. Delays in implementation of measures 
will lead to increased morbidity and mortality and the need for more stringent measures to regain control. In particular, 
efforts should be made to prevent an intensification in transmission from ‘clusters’ to ‘community transmission.
• When feasible, measures should be adjusted (implemented or lifted) in a controlled, stepwise manner to allow better
understanding of the effects of each measure on transmission dynamics.
• Any decision to apply PHSMs must be weighed against the wider impact of the measures on health and well-being 
(lives lost in the short and long term compared to lives saved by applying PHSMs).
Considerations for implementing and adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance
-5-
• Public health surveillance data and findings from case and cluster investigations may provide important information on
conditions associated with transmission or severity. This is particularly important in the context of circulating VOCs, 
and potential new variants, since the lifting of PHSMs may provide a better understanding of the transmission and 
severity characteristics of these variants. Such information may help targeting application or intensification of certain 
PHSMs without imposing the measures universally on all settings (e.g. settings without these variants).
• Any available information on the level of immunity in the general population – either natural or vaccine-induced – must 
be taken into consideration when assessing the likely impact on SARS-CoV-2 transmission of lifting PHSMs.
• Protection of vulnerable populations,12 including those clinically at risk for severe disease should be central in the 
decision to implement, maintain or lift a measure. Vulnerable populations include people aged ≥60 years and/or with 
comorbidities that increase risk of serious COVID-19 disease; disadvantaged groups such as marginalized populations, 
vulnerable migrants and refugees; and those in high density/low resource settings and lower income groups. Vulnerable 
communities and disadvantaged individuals may face immediate challenges in meeting their basic life needs – such as 
income, shelter and food – when PHSMs are implemented and if implemented without adequate support.22 It is crucial 
that those essential needs be taken into account when designing different packages of PHSMs and addressed before 
these packages are implemented to avoid or minimize harm and improve effectiveness. It is critical to safeguard 
vulnerable and disadvantaged populations by implementing specific measures to support them, mobilizing resources 
and engaging all relevant sectors and communities to learn about their concerns and receive feedback. This includes
ensuring access to health services (using community-based service delivery), which is especially challenging when 
transportation, clinics/hospitals and other government services are closed or have long waits. Other essential services 
include supplementary income or food provision; safe places for survivors of and/or those at risk of violence, including 
gender-based violence; and improvement of infrastructure and safety of public transport (which is used most by workers 
in vulnerable populations and essential workers) to make it compatible with PHSMs.
• The potential impact of lifting PHSMs on the health and public health systems capacities to rapidly respond to any new 
increase in cases should be considered. For example:
– Adequate health system capacities should be in place to detect, test and manage new cases and their contacts.
– The risk of outbreaks and/or severe disease in settings with vulnerable individuals should be minimized. This 
requires identifying all major drivers of SARS-CoV-2 transmission (e.g. various types of closed settings such as 
health care facilities and care homes) in the local context and understanding the vaccination coverage of priority
populations in that context, with appropriate measures in place to maximize physical distancing and minimize 
the risk of outbreaks.
– Key drivers of transmission in the area under assessment must be well understood using local surveillance data, 
and measures should be rapidly re-implemented should incidence increase. A particular focus should be on 
prevention and early detection of potential superspreading events.
• Basic risk mitigation measures aimed at reducing travel-associated exportation, importation and onward transmission 
of SARS-CoV-2 should always be maintained. For details, please refer to Considerations for implementing a risk-based 
approach to international travel in the context of COVID-19.
15,16
– In all cases, international travel should be prioritized for emergencies and humanitarian actions (such as emergency 
medical flights and medical evacuations); travel of essential personnel (such as emergency responders, providers of 
public health technical support, and critical personnel in the transport and security sectors such as seafarers);
repatriations; and cargo transport for essential supplies such as food, medicines, and fuel.
– Specific considerations are outlined in this document for the implementation of an individualized approach to 
quarantine and testing for international travellers with natural or vaccine-acquired immunity.
Community engagement and risk communication strategy
When PHSMs are adjusted, communities should be fully and regularly informed, engaged and enabled before changes are made,
to allow them to take ownership of the selected PHSM.
23 It is critical to build and foster trust, especially in contexts where there 
is little or no involvement of the local population in decision-making. Clear, concise and transparent risk communication,
including an evidence-based rationale for adjusting measures, should be developed with communities targeted for PHSM.
In particular:
• Communities should be given recognized roles to provide input and take ownership of when and how PHSMs will be
implemented or lifted.
• Communities will be critical to implementing population-wide PHSMs and contributing to the mitigation of the social 
and economic impact of certain measures (e.g. disrupting availability of food and other needed supplies).
• Civil society organizations, faith-based organizations (FBOs) and volunteers play a critical role in fortifying community 
services (e.g. provision of food, medicines, mental health and other support services, tests and vaccinations) for those 
in need (e.g. people who are isolated or quarantined).
Considerations for implementing and adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance
-6-
• Feedback mechanisms should be established to ensure that any societal impact of changes to PHSMs is quickly 
identified and reported for action. Communities should lead solutions to ensure adoption of measures that best meet 
local needs (for example by considering local cultural practices), which can increase the likelihood of adherence.
• Local community-level networks should be leveraged for sustained efforts by building capacity through training of local 
leaders.
• The infodemic24 that has emerged from COVID-19 information overload and misinformation should be managed at all 
stages of the response by providing the right information at the right time to the right people through trusted channels
(e.g. community and faith leaders, family doctors and other influential members of society). There should be a 
monitoring system in place to capture emerging trends (e.g. vaccine confidence and hesitancy, adherence to PHSM) to 
enable delivery of a targeted communication package.
• A communication and community engagement strategy should be developed before any changes to PHSMs are 
implemented or adjusted.
3 The strategy should be developed in consultation with relevant stakeholders from 
government, civil society, FBOs and community groups. Plans should include, at a minimum, behavioural objectives, 
target audiences, priority channels and a mix of strategies and activities to inform and engage the community.
• The key messages of such plans should cover information important to the community, such as the extent and estimated 
duration of the measures in place.
• Governments should regularly communicate epidemiological data to the public to further foster trust and increase 
acceptance and sustained adherence to PHSMs.
Adjustment of PHSMs based on situational assessment
Table 2 provides more detail on the types of domestic measures that may be implemented for each situational level. The measures 
at each level are only indicative, because some measures may be more or less feasible or appropriate in specific contexts and
locations. Note that overall recommendations on international travel can be found in the interim guidance Considerations for 
implementing a risk-based approach to international travel in the context of COVID-19.
15,16
Measures should be time-bound and regularly re-assessed, at least every two weeks, along with the situational level. The 
adherence to PHSMs should also be monitored, using sources such as mobility data, and this should be used to further inform 
future adjustment of PHSMs and the risk communications and community engagement strategy.
At all Situational Levels, individuals should apply personal protective measures such as hand hygiene, physical distancing, 
respiratory etiquette, staying home if unwell and wearing a mask where appropriate, and environmental measures (e.g. cleaning, 
disinfection, ventilation). Clear information should be provided to the public about what to do if unwell and whom to contact for 
advice, testing and/or treatment.
Considerations for implementing and adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance
-7-
Table 2: Guidance on the implementation of domestic PHSMs for each Situational Level
Situational level Considerations for implementation of PHSMs by situational level*
Situational level 0:
No known transmission 
of SARS-CoV-2 in the
preceding 28 days. The
health system and public
health authorities are 
ready to respond, but 
there are no significant 
restrictions on daily
activities.
Surveillance should ensure that any new case can be detected and managed as early as possible, but 
there should be no restrictions on daily activities.
Authorities may consider implementing the following measures:
• Continue strengthening emergency preparedness, readiness and response actions,
1 ensuring 
adequate stockpiles of medicines and medical equipment and that sufficient staff have been 
recruited and trained to handle anticipated surges in cases.
• Implement or maintain robust surveillance 25 to rapidly detect and investigate suspected SARSCoV-2 cases and clusters26 and ensure public health measures such as isolation and supported 
quarantine27 are undertaken to reduce onward spread if cases are confirmed and contacts are 
identified, respectively.
• Apply a risk-based approach based on the three steps of risk evaluation, risk mitigation and risk 
communication to inform the decision to restrict, modify, postpone, cancel or proceed with 
holding any mass gatherings, including medium and small events. For public gatherings, the risk 
assessment should be undertaken by local and national public health authorities and event 
organizers with input from all relevant stakeholders (emergency management, transport, safety 
and security, etc.). 28,29
Situational level 1:
Basic measures are in 
place to prevent 
transmission; or if cases 
are already present, the
epidemic is being 
controlled through 
effective measures
around the cases, with 
limited and transient 
localized disruption to 
social and economic life.
Specific measures should be taken around cases and/or clusters, and individual measures should be 
strengthened, with limited impact on social and economic activities.
In addition to measures on emergency preparedness, readiness and response actions1 and surveillance, 
personal protective measures and risk communications, authorities may consider implementing the
following measures:
• Emphasis should be placed on case and cluster detection, investigation, and tracing of contacts.
• Promote avoidance of the ‘3 Cs’ – Closed spaces, crowded places and close-contact settings.
• Apply a risk-based approach based on the three steps of risk evaluation, risk mitigation and risk 
communication to inform the decision to restrict, modify, postpone, cancel or proceed with 
holding any mass gatherings, including medium and small events. For public gatherings the risk 
assessment should be undertaken by local and national public health authorities and event 
organizers with input from all relevant stakeholders (emergency management, transport, safety 
and security, etc.). 28,29 Daily activities and services, such as educational settings30, businesses31
and leisure/tourism can remain open with precautionary measures in place to limit the risk of 
spread.
• Put in place measures to protect the most vulnerable, particularly ensuring that there are
appropriate measures in place in long-term care32 and other residential facilities.
Situational level 2:
Low community 
incidence or a risk of 
community transmission 
beyond clusters. 
Additional measures 
with respect to 
Situational level 1 may 
be required to control 
transmission; however, 
disruptions to social and 
economic activities can 
still be limited
Measures should be applied to limit the number of physical encounters with others outside of the 
household, while ensuring services can remain open with precautionary measures in place. A wider 
range of PHSMs may be required to control transmission.
In addition to measures on emergency preparedness and response and surveillance, personal protective
measures and risk communications, authorities may consider implementing the following measures:
• Education settings remain open with precautionary measures in place.
• Businesses remain open, with precautionary measures in place, with teleworking encouraged as 
much as possible.
• Improve local transport infrastructure to comply with PHSMs (improve availability, frequency, 
extension of schedules, etc.).
• Apply a risk-based approach based on the three steps of risk evaluation, risk mitigation and risk 
communication to inform the decision to restrict, modify, postpone, cancel or proceed with 
holding any mass gatherings, including medium and small events. For public gatherings the risk 
assessment should be undertaken by local and national public health authorities and event 
organizers with input from all relevant stakeholders (emergency management, transport, safety 
and security, etc.) 28,29.
• If required, place further emphasis on protecting the most clinically vulnerable, through strict 
application of infection prevention and control measures, heightened surveillance and managing 
visits in long-term care and other residential facilities.
• If contact tracing is overwhelmed, consider prioritization of contact tracing (see Contact tracing 
in the context of COVID-19.
33).
Considerations for implementing and adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance
-8-
Situational level Considerations for implementation of PHSMs by situational level*
Situational level 3:
Community 
transmission with 
limited additional
capacity to respond and 
a risk of health services
becoming overwhelmed. 
A larger combination of 
control measures may 
need to be put in place 
to limit transmission, 
manage cases, and 
ensure epidemic control. 
Strengthening of all PHSMs is needed to avoid more stringent restrictions on movement and other 
related measures applied under level 4. All individuals should reduce their social contacts, and some 
activities may need to close while allowing for essential services, particularly schools, to remain open. 
In settings with high dependence on daily wages and informal economy, mitigation of the potential 
socio-economic costs of strengthening PHSMs needs to be planned properly in advance.
In addition to measures on emergency preparedness and response and surveillance, personal protective 
measures and risk communications, authorities may consider implementing the following measures:
• Adapt the functioning of businesses to minimize COVID-19 risk, including through remote 
working, modified service provision, or closure where necessary.
• Improve local transport infrastructure to comply with PHSMs (improve availability, frequency, 
extension of schedules, etc.).
• Consider limiting in-person university teaching, and institute e-learning.
• Childcare services and primary and secondary schools should remain open with adequate safety 
and surveillance measures in place as long as the local context allows. Continuity of education for
children for their overall well-being, health and safety should be at the forefront of all relevant 
considerations and decisions.
• Due to risk of further transmission in an already high transmission level with limited healthcare 
resources, all PHSMs may be best applied without relaxing any measures according to individuals’
immune status. See section below on “individualized public health measures”.
• Apply a risk-based approach based on the three steps of risk evaluation, risk mitigation and risk 
communication to inform the decision to restrict, modify, postpone, cancel or proceed with holding 
any mass gatherings, including medium and small events. For public gatherings the risk assessment 
should be undertaken by local and national public health authorities and event organizers with input 
from stakeholders (emergency management, transport, safety and security, etc.) 28,29.
• Quantify the needs in advance and provide the necessary socio-economic support for low-income 
individuals and households and those at risk of falling into poverty, ensuring no-one is left behind. 
Socioeconomic recovery for these vulnerable groups and the general population should also be 
prepared for in advance and resources secured to the extent possible.
Situational level 4:
An uncontrolled 
epidemic with limited or 
no additional health 
system response
capacity available, thus
requiring extensive
measures to avoid
overwhelming of health
services and substantial
excess morbidity and
mortality.
Reducing transmission in the community will be challenging, and stringent movement restrictions and 
related measures will need to be put in place to significantly reduce the number of in-person 
encounters. Such measures should be geographically limited to where they are needed and be timebound and aimed to be as short as reasonably possible.
In addition to measures on emergency preparedness and response and surveillance, personal protective
measures and risk communications, authorities may consider implementing the following measures:
• All individuals, including fully vaccinated, partially vaccinated and recovered individuals, should 
stay at home and limit physical contact with people outside the household.
• Essential workers will need to continue activities, with maximum support and safety measures in 
place. Improve local transport infrastructure to comply with PHSMs (improve availability, 
frequency, extension of schedules, add private transport to public transport infrastructure, etc.).
• Close non-essential businesses, and institute remote working.
• Consider all options for continuity of in-person learning. If not possible, limit in-person contact. 
Options may include in-person or blended learning strategies that strictly limit the number of 
people physically on site (exceptions would include children of essential workers and their 
teachers) and remote learning. The closure of educational facilities should only be considered when 
there are no other alternatives.
• All long-term care and other residential facilities should consider strict measures to limit the risk 
of infection, up to and including temporary suspension of in-person visits.
• Cancel or postpone any mass gatherings.
• Quantify needs (in advance) and provide necessary socio-economic support for low-income 
individuals and households and those at risk of falling into poverty, ensuring no-one is left behind. 
Carefully monitor the impact of strict PHSMs on the livelihoods and well-being of these vulnerable 
groups. Socio-economic recovery for these vulnerable groups and the general population should 
also be planned in advance and resources secured to the extent possible.
*The specific measures implemented at each level will need to be carefully considered based on the guiding principles outlined 
above. The measures at each level are only indicative, since some measures may be more or less feasible or appropriate in specific 
contexts and locations
*****************************************************************************************************
Considerations for implementing and adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance
-9-
Considerations for the implementation of individualized public health measures
In settings where robust PHSMs are otherwise in place to control the spread of SARS-CoV-2, allowing the relaxation of some 
measures for some individuals may contribute to limiting the economic and social hardship of control measures. The differential 
“personal protective measures” for immune (fully vaccinated or recovered from infection) versus non-immune individuals will 
be referred to as individualized public health measures.
Applying individualized public health measure recommendations based on someone’s immunity status must be carefully 
considered in the light of a number of aspects, including: the level of transmission of SARS-CoV-2; the evidence around the 
impact of various COVID-19 vaccines in preventing transmission; effectiveness against disease and duration of vaccine-induced 
immunity; the level and duration of protection conferred by natural immunity; the COVID-19 response strategy and risk tolerance 
of the implementing country; the potential circulation of immune-escape VOCs; and important ethical considerations, 
particularly given current limited availability of vaccines worldwide and existing inequities in vaccine availability across and 
within countries and population groups.
Ethical considerations
Details on the ethical considerations related to individualized public health measures in the context of COVID-19 are provided 
in other WHO publications.
17,34 Key considerations can be found below:
• Proportionate and inclusive approach: Before implementing individualized public health measures, governments or other 
competent authorities should, as much as possible, reduce barriers to vaccination; consider measures that least infringe of 
the rights and liberties of non-vaccinated individuals; and consider options for non-vaccinated individuals such as the results 
of reliable negative COVID-19 tests and making tests accessible to all (e.g. free testing once a week) or issuing immunity 
certificates for recovered individuals. This may help ensure that measures for non-vaccinated individuals are proportionate 
and as socially inclusive (defined here as removing or reducing barriers that prevent people from participating in civil, social 
and economic life) as possible.
• Exemptions: A system of recording and verifying exemptions from COVID-19 vaccination based on medical reasons, or 
other reasons provided for in law or relevant regulations, should be established if vaccination certificates are introduced to 
impose individualized public health measures on vaccinated and non-vaccinated individuals. Careful attention should be 
paid to ensuring that the collection, storage and use of such data are limited to scientifically and ethically justified purposes 
compatible with sustained public trust and confidence.
Technical considerations for individualized public health measures
Although vaccinated individuals or individuals with documented past infection may still be able to be (re-)infected and transmit 
the infection, growing evidence (see Table 3) suggests that the risk of infectiousness is substantially lowered. On this basis, 
countries may decide to relax quarantine requirements for individuals with evidence of immunity, since the burden of quarantine 
may outweigh the risk of transmission. However, if circulation of variant(s) able to evade established immunity becomes evident, 
such relaxation may not be advisable, because variants could still be transmitted efficiently.
The lower risk of infection following full COVID-19 vaccination likely varies by COVID-19 vaccine; given the paucity of data 
for all available COVID-19 vaccines, WHO recommends countries adopt a risk-based approach. This should also consider the 
local epidemiological context, and the context of the exposure (risk assessment of exposure), as some settings like health-care 
facilities may pose a higher risk, leading to classification of health-care workers as high-risk contacts.5
Table 3 below summarizes the main technical considerations around individualized public health measures in the context of 
vaccine-induced and natural immunity. The table was drafted based on evidence available as of 14 June 2021.
Considerations for implementing and adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance
-10-
Table 3: Review of existing evidence on SARS-CoV-2 past infection, COVID-19 vaccines and variants of concern, and main 
technical considerations for individualized public health measures in the context of vaccine-induced and natural immunity
Element Considerations 
SARS-CoV-2 infection • Natural immunity confers high levels of protection against reinfection, with estimates 
varying from around 81% to close to 100% protection in people younger than 65 years or 
among health workers during follow up of at least five to seven months.
6,35–37 Protection 
against reinfection appears to vary by age group and is lower (approximately 47%) among 
people aged 65 years and older.
35,38
• Evidence of immunity to SARS-CoV-2 is most commonly determined by measuring 
antibodies in sera. Within four weeks following infection, 90-99% of individuals infected 
with the SARS-CoV-2 virus develop detectable neutralizing antibodies.
14,39,40
• While correlates of protection are yet to be fully established, currently the presence of 
neutralizing antibodies is the best indication for protection against re-infection. How long 
protection lasts remains unclear and may differ depending on disease severity. Protection 
after infection with common cold coronaviruses, which often cause mild disease, is highly 
transient; and for SARS-CoV-2, there is evidence that immunological memory is 6-8 
months.41,42
• While protection is high, natural immunity does not provide 100% sterilizing immunity.
Individuals who have natural immunity are still have a potential risk of reinfection and may 
be infectious.43
COVID-19 vaccination • Different vaccine products may differ in their effectiveness, including against VOCs. The 
risk of onward transmission and duration of protection also may vary. Waning immunity 
and vaccine effectiveness over time will need to be documented as vaccination rollout 
progresses.
• At the time of publication, in human clinical trials, all WHO Emergency Use Listed (EUL) 
vaccines have demonstrated efficacy (63% to 95%) against symptomatic, laboratoryconfirmed COVID-19.
20,44–46
• In human clinical trials, all vaccines that currently have WHO EUL (as of the time of 
publication) have demonstrated high efficacy (over 89%) against severe COVID-19, 
indicating that the chance of developing severe disease in a fully vaccinated person is very 
low for younger and middle-aged adults and very low to moderate for older adults or other 
persons with underlying risk factors.
47,48
• Results from post-introduction observational studies have reported vaccine effectiveness 
estimates ranging from 64% to over 97%. The duration of protection remains unclear, 
because vaccine effectiveness has been measured only shortly after the introduction of the 
vaccines; but a recent eight-month follow up of recipients of one vaccine reported a durable 
response to the studied vaccine.49
• One studied vaccine prevented infection for 70% of individuals at 21 days after a single dose 
and 85% of individuals at 7 days after two doses, providing real-world estimates of vaccine 
protection against infection.50
• There is emerging evidence that vaccination substantially reduces the risk of onward 
transmission of SARS-CoV-2 to susceptible contacts.
51,52
• There is also emerging evidence that use of COVID-19 vaccines at the population level has 
a positive impact on the disease dynamics in the population.53,54
Variants of concern (VOCs) 
(as of the time of 
publication)
• Some SARS-CoV-2 variants, including all currently identified VOCs (i.e. Alpha [B.1.1.7], 
Beta [B.1.351], Gamma [P.1] and Delta [B.1.671.2], exhibit increased transmissibility as 
compared to previously/co-circulating variants.8 This primarily influences transmission 
levels and the potential need to keep general PHSMs in place for longer or at a higher 
intensity, rather than specifically influencing considerations for individualized public health 
measures.
• Evidence of increased resistance of some SARS-CoV-2 variants (including all four VOCs) 
to natural or vaccine-induced neutralizing antibodies has been reported, raising the concern 
that reinfection after natural infection or breakthrough infection after vaccination may 
increase in settings where such VOCs circulate widely.8,55
• The convergent evolution of mutations thought to be associated with higher transmissibility 
or immune escape (e.g. N501Y, E484K) in VOCs highlights the fact that variants will likely 
continue to emerge under selective pressures such as population immunity.56
Note: references cited do not represent an exhaustive list of all relevant references on these topics
Considerations for implementing and adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance
-11-
Implementation of individualized public health measures based on available evidence (as of 14 June 2021)
After taking into consideration ethical and technical considerations and transmission levels, countries may consider relaxing
some measures for individuals meeting either of the following criteria:
• completion of full vaccination with one of the WHO EUL vaccines or approved by a stringent regulatory authority (and 
at least two weeks after completion of vaccination)
• SARS-CoV-2 infection confirmed by RT-PCR within the past 6 months and no longer infectious as per WHO’s Criteria 
for releasing COVID-19 patients from isolation.
55
Depending on the transmission level, below are some options for individualized measures in:
• waiving quarantine following close contact with a confirmed COVID-19 case
• waiving testing and/or quarantine requirements in the context of international travel
• allowing congregating in indoor private settings with other fully vaccinated or recovered individuals without wearing 
masks and without applying physical distancing.
Decision makers should apply a risk-based approach when considering the use of masks for the general public regardless of 
vaccination or natural immunity status. In areas of known or suspected community or cluster SARS-CoV-2 transmission: WHO 
advises that the general public should wear a non-medical mask in indoor (e.g. shops, shared workplaces, schools) or outdoor 
settings where physical distancing of at least 1 metre cannot be maintained. If indoors, unless ventilation has been be assessed 
to be adequate, WHO advises that the general public should wear a non-medical mask, regardless of whether physical distancing 
of at least 1 metre can be maintained.56 As part of the risk-based approach, local authorities may consider allowing congregation 
of fully vaccinated or recovered individuals without wearing masks and without applying physical distancing in indoor private
settings in regions with low SARS-CoV-2 incidence (<20/100000 population). In community or health care settings, where 
measures such as mask wearing are recommended, they should continue to apply to everyone.
Figure 1 provides guidance for a risk-based approach to individualized public health measures, which takes into consideration 
both risk to individuals and to the population. This figure, which is based on the evidence in Table 3, shows that as the 
transmission level increases (left column), the risk of infection for individuals and the overall risk of additional infections and 
onward transmissions increases (arrows in columns 2-5), as does the overall risk of additional cases of severe disease arrows in 
columns 6-9. The differing gradients of the arrows in columns 2-9 further show that the degree of increased risk varies according 
to an individuals’ age and immunity status.
The resulting options are shown in the column labelled “options for individualized public health measures”. At the lowest levels 
of transmission, individualized measures (waiving quarantine in the context of close contact, waiving quarantine and/or testing 
in the context of domestic and international travel, freely congregating in private settings with other fully vaccinated or recovered 
individuals without wearing masks or physical distancing) can be considered for all immune individuals. At the highest 
transmission levels, measures should be retained for all individuals, irrespective of immune status. At intermediate levels of 
transmission, there is a disproportionately high risk of transmission and severe disease in recovered individuals ≥60 and/or with 
underlying risk factors, and authorities may consequently wish to consider retaining measures for this group. Considerations may 
need to be further tailored to local contexts. For example, in situations with no known domestic circulation, a full quarantine 
may be required for all travellers, regardless of immunity status, to control the residual risk of importation. Further, in situations
where healthcare capacity is extremely limited, measures may need to be retained at relatively lower levels of transmission to 
avoid overburdening the health care system with any additional cases.
Considerations for implementing and adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance
-12-
Figure 1. Options for Individualized Public Health Measures
* Most transmission evidence uses an age category of 65 and older, while most severity evidence references persons 60 years and older; for consistency, the more conservative grouping of 60 years and older is retained in 
this table.
† Relaxing of restrictions and preventive measures (waiving quarantine in the context of close contact, waiving quarantine and/or testing in the context of and international travel, freely congregating with other fully 
vaccinated or recovered without wearing masks or physical distancing in private settings) for all immune individuals
‡ Due to increasing risk of severe disease and of transmission
§ Due to moderate to high risk of further transmission, all individuals should stay at home and limit physical contact with people outside the household.
The risk matrix presented above is informed by the scientific evidence on SARS-CoV-2 past infection, COVID-19 vaccines and SARS-CoV-2 variants of 
concern available at the time of this writing. Infection risk is a product of the exposure risk (which is proportionate to the level of transmission of the virus) 
and the susceptibility to infection, if exposed. The net transmission risk is the product of the infection risk and the risk (if infected) of transmitting infection
to non-immune individuals. Given the lack of evidence to the contrary, for the purposes of this framework the risk (if infected) of transmitting infection by 
individuals with reinfection / vaccine-breakthrough infection is assumed to be equal to that seen in primary infection; thus, the net transmission risk is 
assumed to be proportionate to the infection risk. Net risk of severe disease is the product of the infection risk and the risk (if infected) of severe disease.
Exposure risk 
(transmission 
level)
Factors involved in informing options for individualized public health measures
Options for 
individualized 
public health 
measures
Factors that could 
increase the risk
Fully 
vaccinated 
≥60* and/or 
with 
underlying 
risk factors
Fully 
vaccinated 
<60
Recovered 
individuals ≥60 
and/or with 
underlying risk 
factors
Recovered 
individuals 
< 60
Fully 
vaccinated 
≥60 and/or 
with 
underlying 
risk factors
Fully 
vaccinated 
<60
Recovered 
individuals ≥60 
and/or with 
underlying risk 
factors
Recovered 
individuals 
<60
Infection risk / Net transmission Risk Net risk of severe disease
Lower
Higher
Relax measures for all 
immune individuals†
Presence of 
immune escape 
variants
Consider retaining 
measures for recovered 
individuals ≥60 and/or 
with underlying risk 
factors‡
Retain measures for all 
individuals§
Considerations for implementing and adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance
-13-
Considerations for quarantine
As per the evidence presented in Table 3, contacts who are fully vaccinated or contacts without risk factors who have 
recovered from COVID-19 could be considered lower-risk contacts, both in terms of the likelihood of becoming infected and 
the severity of disease if infected. Consequently, some countries may decide to exempt them from quarantine. However, these 
contacts should be advised to monitor their symptoms following their exposure; if symptoms develop, they should be tested for 
SARS-CoV-2, and isolated if they are found to be infected with SARS-CoV-2. Countries may also need to take into 
consideration the context of the exposure (risk assessment of nature of exposure), because some settings like health-care 
facilities may pose a higher risk, leading to classification of health-care workers as high-risk contacts. Tailored adjustment for 
key groups with low risk tolerance may be considered, such as for health care workers or staff of long-term care facilities for 
the elderly, to minimize risks of potential onward transmission.
As lower risk contacts may still pose some residual risk for onward transmission, countries may opt to quarantine lower-risk
contacts if there are concerns about transmission of immune-escape variants, or if their goal is elimination of local transmission.
International travel risk-mitigation measures
At present, WHO does not support the introduction by national authorities or by conveyance operators of requirements for proof 
of vaccination or natural immunity against SARS-CoV-2, neither as a condition for exiting or entering a country, nor as a 
condition for traveling internationally.
57
In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, international travel should always be prioritized for emergencies and humanitarian 
actions; travel by essential personnel; repatriations; and cargo transport of essential supplies such as food, medicines and fuel.
At present, international travellers are not considered contacts of SARS-CoV-2 in principle unless a traveller meets the definition 
of a contact.
15,16 Furthermore, international travellers should not be categorized as suspected COVID-19 cases. Therefore, WHO 
does not recommend healthy travellers as a priority group for SARS-CoV-2 testing, in particular when resources are limited, to 
avoid diverting resources from settings and patients where testing can have a higher public health impact and drive action.15,16
In line with the individualized approach to public health measures outlined earlier in this guidance, countries may consider fully 
vaccinated or recovered individuals as lower-risk travellers and may consider waiving testing and/or quarantine of arriving 
international travellers. Such decisions should be based on a detailed risk assessment that takes into account the COVID-19 
control objectives of the arrival country and the SARS-COV-2 incidence, and prevalence of VOCs, in the departure country. For 
more details, updated interim guidance: Considerations for implementing a risk-based approach to international travel in the 
context of COVID-19 is forthcoming.
15
References
1. World Health Organization. Critical preparedness, readiness and response actions for COVID-19: interim guidance, 7 
March 2020 [Internet]. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020. Available from: 
https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/331422
2. World Health Organization. Considerations for implementing and adjusting public health and social measures in the 
context of COVID-19: interim guidance, 4 November 2020 [Internet]. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020. 
Available from: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/336374
3. World Health Organization. COVID-19 vaccines [Internet]. [cited 2021 May 3]. Available from: 
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/covid-19-vaccines
4. Haas EJ, Angulo FJ, McLaughlin JM, Anis E, Singer SR, Khan F, et al. Impact and effectiveness of mRNA BNT162b2 
vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 infections and COVID-19 cases, hospitalisations, and deaths following a nationwide 
vaccination campaign in Israel: an observational study using national surveillance data. The Lancet [Internet]. 2021 May 
5 [cited 2021 May 10];0(0). Available from: https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(21)00947-
8/abstract
5. Thompson MG. Interim Estimates of Vaccine Effectiveness of BNT162b2 and mRNA-1273 COVID-19 Vaccines in 
Preventing SARS-CoV-2 Infection Among Health Care Personnel, First Responders, and Other Essential and Frontline 
Workers — Eight U.S. Locations, December 2020–March 2021. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep [Internet]. 2021 [cited 
2021 Jun 14];70. Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/70/wr/mm7013e3.htm
6. Hall VJ, Foulkes S, Saei A, Andrews N, Oguti B, Charlett A, et al. COVID-19 vaccine coverage in health-care workers 
in England and effectiveness of BNT162b2 mRNA vaccine against infection (SIREN): a prospective, multicentre, cohort 
study. The Lancet. 2021 May 8;397(10286):1725–35.
Considerations for implementing and adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance
-14-
7. World Health Organization. COVID-19 weekly epidemiological update, 30 March 2021 [Internet]. 2021 Mar. Available 
from: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/340513
8. World Health Organization. COVID-19 weekly epidemiological update, edition 43, 8 June 2021 [Internet]. Geneva: 
World Health Organization; 2021 Jun. Available from: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/341716
9. Davies NG, Jarvis CI, Edmunds WJ, Jewell NP, Diaz-Ordaz K, Keogh RH. Increased mortality in community-tested 
cases of SARS-CoV-2 lineage B.1.1.7. Nature. 2021 Mar 15;1–5.
10. Moore S, Hill EM, Tildesley MJ, Dyson L, Keeling MJ. Vaccination and non-pharmaceutical interventions for COVID19: a mathematical modelling study. The Lancet Infectious Diseases [Internet]. 2021 Mar 18 [cited 2021 Mar 22];0(0). 
Available from: https://www.thelancet.com/journals/laninf/article/PIIS1473-3099(21)00143-2/abstract
11. Li J, Giabbanelli PJ. Returning to a normal life via COVID-19 vaccines in the USA: a large-scale agent-based simulation 
study. medRxiv. 2021 Feb 3;2021.01.31.21250872.
12. World Health Organization. WHO SAGE Roadmap For Prioritizing Uses Of COVID-19 Vaccines In The Context Of 
Limited Supply [Internet]. [cited 2021 May 7]. Available from: https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/who-sageroadmap-for-prioritizing-uses-of-covid-19-vaccines-in-the-context-of-limited-supply
13. Huang B, Wang J, Cai J, Yao S, Chan PKS, Tam TH, et al. Integrated vaccination and physical distancing interventions 
to prevent future COVID-19 waves in Chinese cities. Nature Human Behaviour. 2021 Feb 18;1–11.
14. Wells CR, Galvani AP. The interplay between COVID-19 restrictions and vaccination. The Lancet Infectious Diseases 
[Internet]. 2021 Mar 31 [cited 2021 Apr 8];0(0). Available from: 
https://www.thelancet.com/journals/laninf/article/PIIS1473-3099(21)00074-8/abstract
15. World Health Organization. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) travel advice [Internet]. [cited 2021 May 7]. Available 
from: https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/travel-advice
16. World Health Organization. Considerations for implementing a risk-based approach to international travel in the context 
of COVID-19: interim guidance, 16 December 2020 [Internet]. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020. Available 
from: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/337858
17. World Health Organization. COVID-19 natural immunity: scientific brief, 10 May 2021 [Internet]. Geneva: World 
Health Organization; 2021. Available from: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/341241
18. World Health Organization. Annexes to the interim recommendations for use of the inactivated COVID-19 vaccine BIBP 
developed by China National Biotec Group (CNBG), Sinopharm: grading of evidence: evidence to recommendation 
tables, 7 May 2021 [Internet]. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021. Available from: 
https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/341254
19. World Health Organization. Annexes to the interim recommendations for use of the ChAdOx1-S [recombinant] vaccine 
against COVID-19 (AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine AZD1222, SII Covishield, SK Bioscience): grading of evidence -
evidence to recommendations tables, first issued 10 February 2021, updated 21 April 2021 [Internet]. Geneva: World 
Health Organization; 2021. Available from: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/340921
20. World Health Organization. Background document on the mRNA-1273 vaccine (Moderna) against COVID-19: 
background document to the WHO Interim recommendations for use of the mRNA-1273 vaccine (Moderna), 3 February 
2021 [Internet]. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021. Available from: 
https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/339218
21. World Health Organization. COVID-19 global risk communication and community engagement strategy, December 2020 
- May 2021: interim guidance, 23 December 2020 [Internet]. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020. Available from: 
https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/338057
22. WHO Working Group on Ethics & SARS-CoV-2. Ethics & SARS-CoV-2 – Restrictive Measures and Physical 
Distancing [Internet]. [cited 2021 May 3]. Available from: https://epidemicethics.tghn.org/articles/ethics-sars-cov-2-
restrictive-measures-and-physical-distancing/
23. World Health Organization. Risk communication and community engagement (RCCE) readiness and response to the 
2019 novel coronaviruses (2019-nCoV): interim guidance, 26 January 2020 [Internet]. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2020. Available from: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/330678
24. World Health Organization. Infodemic management of WHO Information Net Work for Epidemics [Internet]. [cited 
2021 Jun 14]. Available from: https://www.who.int/teams/risk-communication/infodemic-management
25. World Health Organization. Public health surveillance for COVID-19: interim guidance, 16 December 2020 [Internet]. 
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020. Available from: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/337897
26. World Health Organization. Considerations in the investigation of cases and clusters of COVID-19: interim guidance, 22 
October 2020 [Internet]. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020. Available from: 
https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/336224
27. World Health Organization. Recommendations to Member States to improve hand hygiene practices to help prevent the 
transmission of the COVID-19 virus: interim guidance, 1 April 2020 [Internet]. Geneva: World Health Organization; 
2020. Available from: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/331661
Considerations for implementing and adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance
-15-
28. World Health Organization. Key planning recommendations for mass gatherings in the context of the current COVID-19 
outbreak: interim guidance, 14 February 2020 [Internet]. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020. Available from: 
https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/331004
29. World Health Organization. Considerations for mass gatherings in the context of COVID-19: annex: considerations in 
adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19, 14 May 2020 [Internet]. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2020. Available from: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/332079
30. World Health Organization, United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), United Nations Educational Scientific and 
Cultural Organization. Considerations for school-related public health measures in the context of COVID-19: annex to 
considerations in adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19, 14 September 2020 [Internet]. 
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020. Available from: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/334294
31. World Health Organization. Getting your workplace ready for COVID-19: How COVID-19 spreads, 19 March 2020 
[Internet]. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020. Available from: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/331584
32. World Health Organization. Infection prevention and control guidance for long-term care facilities in the context of 
COVID-19: interim guidance, 8 January 2021 [Internet]. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021. Available from: 
https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/338481
33. World Health Organization. Contact tracing in the context of COVID-19: interim guidance, 1 February 2021 [Internet]. 
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021. Available from: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/339128
34. World Health Organization. COVID-19 Vaccination Certificates/Passports and Lifting Public Health and Social 
Measures – Key Ethical Issues. Forthcoming 2021. 
35. Hansen CH, Michlmayr D, Gubbels SM, Mølbak K, Ethelberg S. Assessment of protection against reinfection with 
SARS-CoV-2 among 4 million PCR-tested individuals in Denmark in 2020: a population-level observational study. The 
Lancet. 2021 Mar 27;397(10280):1204–12.
36. Lumley SF, O’Donnell D, Stoesser NE, Matthews PC, Howarth A, Hatch SB, et al. Antibody Status and Incidence of 
SARS-CoV-2 Infection in Health Care Workers. New England Journal of Medicine. 2021 Feb 11;384(6):533–40.
37. Abu-Raddad LJ, Chemaitelly H, Malek JA, Ahmed AA, Mohamoud YA, Younuskunju S, et al. Assessment of the risk of 
SARS-CoV-2 reinfection in an intense re-exposure setting. Clin Infect Dis. 2020 Dec 14;
38. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Risk of SARS-CoV-2 transmission from newly-infected individuals 
with documented previous infection or vaccination [Internet]. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. 2021 
[cited 2021 Apr 8]. Available from: https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications-data/sars-cov-2-transmission-newlyinfected-individuals-previous-infection
39. Guthmiller JJ, Stovicek O, Wang J, Changrob S, Li L, Halfmann P, et al. SARS-CoV-2 Infection Severity Is Linked to 
Superior Humoral Immunity against the Spike. mBio [Internet]. 2021 Feb 23 [cited 2021 Apr 8];12(1). Available from: 
https://mbio.asm.org/content/12/1/e02940-20
40. Wajnberg A, Mansour M, Leven E, Bouvier NM, Patel G, Firpo-Betancourt A, et al. Humoral response and PCR 
positivity in patients with COVID-19 in the New York City region, USA: an observational study. The Lancet Microbe. 
2020 Nov 1;1(7):e283–9.
41. Edridge AWD, Kaczorowska J, Hoste ACR, Bakker M, Klein M, Loens K, et al. Seasonal coronavirus protective 
immunity is short-lasting. Nature Medicine. 2020 Nov;26(11):1691–3.
42. Dan JM, Mateus J, Kato Y, Hastie KM, Yu ED, Faliti CE, et al. Immunological memory to SARS-CoV-2 assessed for up 
to 8 months after infection. Science [Internet]. 2021 Feb 5 [cited 2021 Apr 8];371(6529). Available from: 
https://science.sciencemag.org/content/371/6529/eabf4063
43. Adrielle dos Santos L, Filho PG de G, Silva AMF, Santos JVG, Santos DS, Aquino MM, et al. Recurrent COVID-19 
including evidence of reinfection and enhanced severity in thirty Brazilian healthcare workers. Journal of Infection. 2021 
Mar 1;82(3):399–406.
44. World Health Organization. Background document on the Janssen Ad26.COV2.S (COVID-19) vaccine: background 
document to the WHO Interim recommendations for use of Ad26.COV2.S (COVID-19) vaccine, 17 March 2021 
[Internet]. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021. Available from: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/340180
45. World Health Organization. Background document on the mRNA vaccine BNT162b2 (Pfizer-BioNTech) against 
COVID-19: background document to the WHO interim recommendations for use of the Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 
vaccine, BNT162b2, under emergency use listing, 14 January 2021 [Internet]. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021. 
Available from: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/338671
46. World Health Organization. Background document on the AZD1222 vaccine against COVID-19 developed by Oxford 
University and AstraZeneca: background document to the WHO Interim recommendations for use of the AZD1222 
(ChAdOx1-S [recombinant]) vaccine against COVID19 developed by Oxford University and AstraZeneca, 1 March 2021 
[Internet]. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021. Available from: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/339882
47. Vaccines and Related Biological Products Advisory Committee December 17, 2020 Meeting Announcement -
12/17/2020 - 12/17/2020 [Internet]. FDA. 2021 [cited 2021 Apr 8]. Available from: https://www.fda.gov/advisorycommittees/advisory-committee-calendar/vaccines-and-related-biological-products-advisory-committee-december-17-
2020-meeting-announcement
Considerations for implementing and adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance
-16-
48. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Interim guidance on the benefits of full vaccination against 
COVID-19 for transmission and implications for non-pharmaceutical interventions [Internet]. European Centre for 
Disease Prevention and Control. 2021 [cited 2021 May 3]. Available from: https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/publicationsdata/interim-guidance-benefits-full-vaccination-against-covid-19-transmission
49. Widge AT, Rouphael NG, Jackson LA, Anderson EJ, Roberts PC, Makhene M, et al. Durability of Responses after 
SARS-CoV-2 mRNA-1273 Vaccination. New England Journal of Medicine. 2021 Jan 7;384(1):80–2.
50. Leshem E, Lopman BA. Population immunity and vaccine protection against infection. The Lancet [Internet]. 2021 Apr 
23 [cited 2021 May 3];0(0). Available from: https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(21)00870-
9/abstract
51. Harris RJ, Hall JA, Zaidi A, Andrews NJ, Dunbar JK. Impact of vaccination on household transmission of SARS-COV-2 
in England. Pre-print. [Internet]. Available from: 
https://khub.net/documents/135939561/390853656/Impact+of+vaccination+on+household+transmission+of+SARSCOV-2+in+England.pdf/35bf4bb1-6ade-d3eb-a39e-9c9b25a8122a
52. V Shah AS, Gribben C, Bishop J, Hanlon P, Caldwell D, Wood R, et al. Effect of vaccination on transmission of 
COVID-19: an observational study in healthcare workers and their households. medRxiv. 2021 Jan 
1;2021.03.11.21253275.
53. COVID-19 dynamics after a national immunization program in Israel | Nature Medicine [Internet]. [cited 2021 May 3]. 
Available from: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41591-021-01337-2
54. Victora C, Castro MC, Gurzenda S, Barros AJD. Estimating the early impact of immunization against COVID-19 on 
deaths among elderly people in Brazil: analyses of secondary data on vaccine coverage and mortality. medRxiv. 2021 Jan 
1;2021.04.27.21256187.
55. Garcia-Beltran WF, Lam EC, St. Denis K, Nitido AD, Garcia ZH, Hauser BM, et al. Multiple SARS-CoV-2 variants 
escape neutralization by vaccine-induced humoral immunity. Cell. 2021 Apr 29;184(9):2372-2383.e9.
56. Madhi SA, Baillie V, Cutland CL, Voysey M, Koen AL, Fairlie L, et al. Efficacy of the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 Covid-19 
Vaccine against the B.1.351 Variant. New England Journal of Medicine [Internet]. 2021 Mar 16 [cited 2021 May 3]; 
Available from: https://www.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/NEJMoa2102214
57. World Health Organization. Mask use in the context of COVID-19: interim guidance, 1 December 2020 [Internet]. 
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020. Available from: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/337199
58. World Health Organization. Statement on the seventh meeting of the International Health Regulations (2005) Emergency 
Committee regarding the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic [Internet]. [cited 2021 May 7]. Available from: 
https://www.who.int/news/item/19-04-2021-statement-on-the-seventh-meeting-of-the-international-health-regulations-
(2005)-emergency-committee-regarding-the-coronavirus-disease-(covid-19)-pandemic
Considerations for implementing and adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance
-17-
Annex
Public health criteria to adjust public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19
Introduction
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, countries around the globe have implemented public health and social measures (PHSM)
for the control of SARS-CoV-2 transmission. As the local epidemiology of the disease changes, vaccines are rolled out and new 
variants of concern (VOCs) emerge, regular adjustment of such measures will be necessary.
This annex updates the annex to Critical preparedness, readiness and response actions for COVID-19 published on 4 November
2020 and outlines a process for decision-making on adapting PHSMs to the epidemiological situation, taking into account 
surveillance and testing capacities, the vaccination coverage in the target population and the health system’s capacity for 
response. It should be read in conjunction with the main body of this document and the earlier interim guidance.1
This annex is intended for the public health divisions of national and sub-national authorities in locations that have introduced
PHSMs and are considering adjusting them. Its guidance is restricted to the public health domain. Other documents published 
by WHO address different considerations that should enter into decision-making about introducing or loosening PHSM, 
including the welfare of a population.
How to use the guidance in this annex
The public health criteria in this annex are grouped into two dimensions that should be evaluated to address two main questions:
1. Epidemiological situation/Transmission classification – Is the epidemic controlled?
2. Health system and public health services capacity and performance – Is the health system able to detect and cope
with COVID-19 cases while maintaining other essential health services?
These two dimensions should further be considered in the context of the national COVID-19 response strategy. Thresholds for 
action may depend on the country’s overall strategy, and whether it is pursuing an elimination or control strategy.
The criteria are not prescriptive, and it may not be feasible to assess some of them, because of a lack of data, for example. 
Countries should focus on the criteria most relevant for them to inform decision making. In countries with limited surveillance 
data, vaccination coverage data among target groups can help steer decisions about PHSM, together with indicators from sentinel 
surveillance in health facilities or bed occupancy. The thresholds are indicative and may need to be revisited as further 
information about the epidemiology of COVID-19 and the impact of measures become available. It is recommended to 
systematically assess these criteria at least biweekly at the lowest operational subnational administrative level that is practical 
to inform tailored local responses.
This Annex also includes a third section presenting risk matrices for informing individualized public health measures.
1. Epidemiological situation/Transmission classification
Transmission classification categories can be used to determine the extent to which the epidemic can be considered controlled 
within each country/area and at sub-national levels. The transmission categories in one country, if published, are also useful to 
others when considering adjusting policies on trade and travel.
Defining transmission classification
The transmission classification developed in the last guidance has been maintained, with seven categories, as outlined in Table 1.
Annex Table 1: Definition of the categories for transmission classification
Category name Definition
Countries/territories/areas with:
No (active) cases No new cases detected for at least 28 days (two times the maximum incubation 
period), in the presence of a robust* surveillance system. This implies a nearzero risk of infection for the general population.
Imported / Sporadic cases Cases detected in the past 14 days are all imported, sporadic (e.g. laboratory
acquired or zoonotic) or are all linked to imported/sporadic cases, and there
are no clear signals of further locally acquired transmission. This implies
minimal risk of infection for the general population.
Considerations for implementing and adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance
-18-
Clusters of cases Cases detected in the past 14 days are predominantly limited to well-defined
clusters that are not directly linked to imported cases, but which are all linked
by time, geographic location and common exposures. It is assumed that there 
are a number of unidentified cases in the area. This implies a low risk of 
infection to others in the wider community if exposure to these clusters is
avoided.
Community transmission – level 1 (CT1) Low incidence of locally acquired, widely dispersed cases detected in the past 
14 days, with many of the cases not linked to specific clusters; transmission 
may be focused in certain population sub-groups. Low risk of infection for the 
general population.
Community transmission – level 2 (CT2) Moderate incidence of locally acquired widely dispersed cases detected in 
the past 14 days; transmission less clearly focused in certain population subgroups. Moderate risk of infection for the general population.
Community transmission – level 3 (CT3) High incidence of locally acquired, widely dispersed cases in the past 14 days; 
transmission widespread and not focused in population sub-groups. High risk 
of infection for the general population.
Community transmission – level 4 (CT4) Very high incidence of locally acquired widely dispersed cases in the past 14 
days. Very high risk of infection for the general population.
* Note that in situations where COVID-19 surveillance is not robust, a lack of identified cases should not be interpreted as an
absence of transmission; alternate indicators (see Table 5) should be examined to assess the possibility of undetected COVID19 cases.
Primary indicators for assessing the level of community transmission
Four primary indicators to determine community transmission are proposed in Table 2. They are based on data that should be
routinely collected during the pandemic. The relative importance of each available indicator will vary according to the local
context (e.g. the reliability of the data for each indicator); and described limitations to interpreting each indicator should be taken 
into account. Indicators should be measured at the lowest administrative level of operations possible to inform targeted public 
health interventions. To develop transmission classification at a higher administrative level, a separate analysis should be 
conducted using indicators for that level, rather than attempting to aggregate lower-level transmission classifications.
These indicators should be used alongside other epidemiologic information available either routinely or through special studies 
or modelling estimates, as well as non-epidemiologic data and other considerations, for informing strategic and operational 
decisions.
It is recommended that these indicators be assessed biweekly, adopting the epidemiological week definition used in the country.
Ranges for the four indicators in Table 2 were developed through a review of existing data. They can be used to guide the
application of the transmission classification at sub-national levels. These ranges are indicative and may require adjustment to 
local contexts and based on the performance (e.g. sensitivity, representativeness) of the local surveillance system and testing 
strategy and should be revisited periodically. Caution should be exercised when interpreting changes in indicators that occur in 
the context of changes to the surveillance system (e.g. an increase in testing rate or a change in the population under surveillance). 
Note that some indicators (e.g. overall incidence) may be higher in the presence of very large clusters, as in the case of 
superspreading events, than during community transmission.
It is helpful to monitor the testing rate as a measure of the coverage of surveillance. A minimum recommended rate is at least 
one person tested per 1000 population per week. Testing should not be limited to specific populations (e.g. only those in urban 
settings with high access to testing, or travellers). Denominator data must be available at the level of disaggregation being 
assessed (e.g. district, province). Some authorities may choose to specifically track these indicators among groups of individuals 
at greatest risk for severe disease and death.
After all available indicators are calculated, if the levels calculated based on each indicator are different, a qualitative review
should be undertaken to determine the final transmission classification. It is recommended that if data are not available (or 
reliable) for all indicators, more weight should be given to the indicators considered more reliable in the local context. In many 
cases, indicators listed higher in Table 2 may be more reliable than those lower in the table.
In places where indicator values are not reliable, but the system is stable, trends can be used as an alternative assessment. One
example would be a situation in which there is a very low testing rate, and many cases are likely missed, but the testing strategy 
is not changed.
Considerations for implementing and adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance
-19-
Annex Table 2: Primary epidemiological indicators and proposed ranges to assess the level of COVID-19 transmission
Domain Indicator Description/Rationale Major limitations Level of community transmission
CT 1 CT 2 CT 3 CT 4
Hospitalization
Rate
New 
COVID- 19
hospitalizations
per 100 000
population per
week*
A subset of all incident
cases require
hospitalization; thus,
this is an indirect
indicator of incidence.
Unlikely to be subject to
surveillance policy
changes/differences.
May be influenced
by hospitalization
policy, e.g. if even
mild cases are
hospitalized for
isolation purposes.
Delayed measure
of incidence.
<5 5 - <10 10 - <30 30+
Mortality Number of
COVID19-
attributed
deaths per 100
000 population
per week*
A subset of all incident
cases are fatal, and thus
this is an indirect
indicator of incidence.
Minimally influenced
by surveillance policy if
testing is
comprehensive.
Delayed measure
of incidence. At
low levels and in
small geographical
regions, can be
sensitive to minor
fluctuations (e.g.
one versus two
deaths).
<1 1 - <2 2 - <5 5+
Case Incidence New confirmed
cases per 100
000 population
per week*
Direct measure of
incidence
Heavily influenced
by surveillance
system
performance,
testing policy and
laboratory
capacity. At low
levels and in small
geographical
regions, can be
sensitive to minor
fluctuations in case
counts, particularly
due to batch
reporting.
<20 20 -
<50
50 -
<150
150+
Testing Test 
positivity rate 
per week
(nonsentinel)*
This may be useful if 
there are limited 
sentinel sites. It may 
capture atypical cases 
better than sentinel 
surveillance.
Heavily 
influenced by 
testing strategy 
and capacity.
< 2% 2% - <
5%
5% -
<20%
20%+
*Consider averaging over a two-week period to minimize the effect of random fluctuations.
Note: the thresholds in this table may be updated as additional data become available.
Additional indicators
Additional indicators that can provide further evidence to help classify the level of transmission are listed in Table 3. These 
indicators may not be readily available at the lowest administrative level of operations, however. They are therefore considered 
secondary to the primary four indicators listed in Table 2. Furthermore, they may not directly reflect transmission or force of 
infection of SARS- CoV-2 or may be more difficult to interpret and compare than those listed in Table 2. Thresholds are not 
presented for the secondary indicators, due to a lack of available data, high local variability or both.
As a last resort, where no indicator values are available, subjective assessment can be used, but this should be done over several
weeks to avoid influences from transient or anecdotal observations.
Considerations for implementing and adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance
-20-
Annex Table 3: Additional epidemiological indicators to assess level of COVID-19 community transmission*
Indicator Description/Limitations
Intensive care unit (ICU) proportional occupancy The proportion of new ICU admissions attributed to COVID19, out of all ICU admissions for the same period 
(alternatively, proportion of current ICU beds occupied by 
patients with COVID-19, out of all occupied ICU beds)
Instantaneous reproduction number (Rt) The instantaneous reproduction number is the average number 
of secondary cases each current case would produce if 
conditions remained the same. Rt should be estimated over 
successive weekly time windows and should be considered in 
combination with the number of cases at a given time. When 
there is a large volume of cases at a given time, Rt near 1.0 
would sustain a high number of cases. While this is a widely 
used indicator of transmissibility, it requires familiarity with the 
various methods for calculation and sufficiently reliable and 
timely data on incidence. It also assumes a known serial interval 
distribution, which can in practice be hard to estimate for 
COVID-19 due to limited data on transmission chains.
Daily growth rate The daily growth rate measures the epidemic growth or decline 
of an epidemic. It is approximately the percent of 
increase/decrease in daily case incidence.
Doubling time The number of days required for the daily incidence to double.
This is directly determined by the daily growth rate r and linked 
to Rt and the serial interval distribution. All else being equal, 
higher Rt will lead to shorter doubling times.
Proportion of unlinked cases among new cases This is defined as the proportion of cases not previously listed 
as contacts (alternatively, the proportion not linked to known 
clusters/transmission chains). It is a measure of the spread in 
the community beyond known clusters. It is heavily 
influenced by case investigation and contact tracing capacity.
Test positivity proportion from sentinel sites averaged over 
a two- week period
Minimally influenced by testing strategy or capacity. Can 
provide a good, standardized way to monitor evolution over 
time if adequate number of samples are collected and sites are 
geographically representative.
May not be representative of the general population if there are 
only limited sentinel sites.
Influenza-like-illness (ILI) or Severe Acute Respiratory 
Infection (SARI) trends
This is not directly indicative of COVID-19 cases, but sentinel 
surveillance for ILI and SARI can also capture a proportion of 
COVID-19 cases, and thus this is useful for monitoring trends 
for COVID-19. This measure may be helpful where COVID19-specific surveillance is not robust.
Secondary attack rates (SAR) This captures the probability that a contact person is infected 
following exposure to a confirmed case during their infectious 
period. Comparison of secondary attack rates in different 
contexts (e.g. vaccinated versus non-vaccinated individuals, 
different types of exposures, different variants) can shed light 
on risk factors for increased transmission.
Considerations for implementing and adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance
-21-
All-cause hospitalization rate trends This is not directly indicative of COVID-19 hospitalizations but, 
where COVID-19 cases make up a substantial proportion of 
hospitalizations, this can be useful for identifying trends in 
COVID-19 cases. These rates may decline due to restricted 
service provision and other public health measures. Trends must 
be analysed in the context of other potential causes of changes
in hospitalization rates (e.g. concurrent influenza circulation). 
These trends may be helpful where COVID-19-specific 
surveillance is not robust.
All-cause (excess) mortality trends This measure is not directly indicative of COVID-19 
cases/deaths, but where COVID-19 deaths make up a 
substantial proportion of overall deaths, this can be useful for 
identifying trends in COVID-19 cases. Trends must be analysed
in the context of other potential causes of changes in mortality 
rates (e.g. concurrent influenza circulation) and ideally 
compared with baseline data on mortality to identify excess 
above expected (e.g. seasonal) fluctuations. While this is a 
widely used indicator of transmission, it requires careful 
consideration of the inherent biases in mortality estimation 
methods.3 This may also be a delayed indicator, depending on 
death and vital records system processes. These trends may be
helpful where COVID-19-specific surveillance is not robust.
Cumulative vaccination uptake (by first dose or fully 
vaccinated)
Defined as the proportion of individuals who received a) the 
first dose, or b) the full recommended series of any COVID-19 
vaccine, as percentages of the total population of a country or 
area.
Cumulative vaccination uptake can provide a useful indication 
of population coverage†
, especially in the short term. Over 
longer timeframes, using uptake data to infer vaccination 
coverage also needs to take into account changes in the 
population denominator (including by age group), especially 
mortality among targeted groups. Uptake and coverage data 
may provide an indication of population protection from 
COVID-19 disease during the months following vaccination. It 
is currently unknown whether such protection might wane over 
longer timeframes or whether new virus variants might affect 
vaccine efficacy and effectiveness. Evidence about the role of 
vaccination in preventing infection and preventing transmission 
is being assessed. 
*This list should not be considered exhaustive. † For further information on COVID-19 vaccination uptake, rate, and coverage, 
please refer to Monitoring COVID-19 Vaccination, Page 5.4
Trends in transmission
In addition to calculating the category of transmission classification, it is also important to understand the direction of the trends 
of contributing indicators (stable, decreasing or increasing) over several weeks. This can assist in determining whether measures
implemented are improving the epidemiological situation in the area, and for planning future changes, or putting in place 
anticipatory changes to public health measures based on a likely change in the transmission classification.
2. Health and public health services capacity and performance
The capacity to respond to the existing epidemiologic situation of COVID-19 (i.e., the transmission classification) is a key
consideration in the decision to adapt PHSM. Clinical care and public health services are two key domains that reflect the ability 
of a country to adapt and respond to the requirements of both the COVID-19 caseload and the burden of disease more generally.
Sufficient clinical care capacity is required to treat both inpatient and ambulatory cases of COVID-19 while ensuring that the 
health system is not overwhelmed and can continue to treat the regular caseload of patients with other conditions, particularly 
during seasonal peaks, such as the influenza season, and at times of rapid or large increases in SARS-CoV-2 transmission. The 
public health response relies on the capacity of the surveillance system to detect and respond to changes in SARS-CoV-2
transmission and focuses on key activities including case detection, diagnostic testing and contact tracing. Each of the two 
domains (health services and public health) is divided into two principal sub-domains, namely capacity (output indicators) and 
performance (outcome and impact indicators).
Considerations for implementing and adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance
-22-
While this section is not aimed to be overly prescriptive, it provides quantitative thresholds (Table 4) to categorize response 
capacity and performance into three categories: adequate, moderate and limited. It is important to note that capacity needs to be 
assessed in the context of the current transmission classification. Response capacity that has been considered adequate may, 
under a higher incidence scenario, be reduced to moderate or limited response capacity.
Assessing the overall level of health system and public health services capacity and performance
To assess the overall capacity and performance of the health system and public health services, authorities should use the same
approach as outlined for transmission classification. This includes:
• prioritizing those indicators that are available and reliable and adjusting thresholds to local contexts and reliability of 
the data
• interpreting changes to indicators in the context of changes to data collection mechanisms
• undertaking a qualitative review to determine the final health system capacity level if the levels calculated based on
each indicator are different
• using trends instead of quantitative thresholds where data are not reliable, but denominators are stable
• using subjective assessment as a last resort if no data are available
• observing trends in indicators to anticipate future changes to the health system and public health services capacity and 
performance level.
Additional indicators that can be used for triangulation are provided in Table 5. Assessments should be updated biweekly.
Annex Table 4: Primary indicators and proposed ranges to assess level of COVID-19 health system and public health 
services capacity and performance
Domain Indicator Descriptio
n/
Ri l
Major limitations Capacity to respond
Adequate Moderate Limited
Clinical care
capacity
Proportion 
of occupied
hospital beds
High morbidity and
mortality will occur 
if there is 
insufficient capacity 
to hospitalize severe
cases. Should count
all hospitalizations,
not only COVID19
May be influenced by
hospitalization policy 
(e.g. if all cases are 
isolated in hospital), 
which does not indicate 
true saturation of
hospital capacity.
<75%† 75-<90%† 90%+ †
Clinical care
performance
Case fatality
rate of
resolved 
(i.e.,
outcome
known)
hospitalized
cases
Overall impact
indicator of 
adequate COVID19 care.
Highly dependent on 
age and various biases.3 
Must take into account 
any changes in case 
detection or testing 
strategy.
Decreasing 
trend
Stable
trend
Increasing
trend
Considerations for implementing and adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance
-23-
Public health
response
capacity
Number of
persons tested
per 1000
population 
per week,
averaged over
a two-week
period
Without sufficient
testing, it is 
difficult to 
appropriately
isolate and treat
cases.
Not all laboratories are
able to report individuals
tested; if possible, can
count number of new
rather than repeat tests;
otherwise can count
number of tests, but this
may be misleading due 
to repeat testing. 
Laboratories not 
reporting location of
cases may mask 
disparities in testing (e.g. 
among non-urban 
populations). If using 
rapid diagnostic tests, 
these should be used
according to guidance, 
and thresholds may need 
to be raised.
4+ 1 - < 4 <1
Public health
response
performance
Proportion 
of cases for
which an
investigation
has been
conducted
within 24
hours of
identification
This indicates the
capacity to identify
transmission risks 
and exposed 
contacts.
Where investigation
is not recorded
directly, can be
measured by proxy
indicator -
proportion of cases 
with contacts listed.
May be difficult to 
obtain timely data.
80%+ 60 - <80% <60%
Public health
response
performance
Support for /
adherence to
PHSMs (can 
be further 
subdivided 
into personal 
protective 
measures 
versus other 
measures)
Qualitative
assessment based on
observation, media
monitoring,
perception or
behaviour surveys,
hotlines, focus
groups, etc. 
Analysis including 
forecasting of 
effectiveness of
PHSM to be 
considered, it is 
important to identify 
not only the current 
status but any
barriers or enablers 
to improvement. 
May be highly variable
between sub-groups 
and across individual 
PHSMs and over time.
High (nearly
universal
adherence to 
most
PHSMs).
Moderate
(modest
adherence
to most
PHSMs, or
variable
adherence
across
individual
PHSMs).
Low
(minimal
adherence to 
most
PHSMs).
† Hospital occupancy routinely varies considerably between countries and health systems. Therefore, baseline (pre-COVID-19) 
occupancy must be taken into consideration.
** A significantly low hospital occupancy rate may also indicate barriers to access to hospital care, requiring investigation into
the causes and remedial actions to be taken. In situations of community transmission, low hospital utilization may indicate large 
numbers of community deaths, which would potentially not be captured in facility-based mortality reports.
Considerations for implementing and adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance
-24-
Annex Table 5: Additional indicators to assess level of COVID-19 health system and public health services capacity and 
performance*
Indicator Description/Limitations
Number of trained ICU staff per 10
000 population
This indicates sufficient clinical capacity to respond to cases most likely to lead to
mortality. This indicator may be more relevant when measured against a population of
clinically vulnerablei persons, if data are available. This indicator is difficult to measure. 
It is a necessary but insufficient measure of ability to provide intensive care.
Number of ICU beds per 10 000
clinically vulnerable populationi
Mortality from COVID-19 will be highest if capacity for intensive care is exceeded.
Strictly counting the number of ICU beds does not guarantee successful care if there is
inadequate staffing, equipment or supplies.
Proportion of occupied ICU beds This indicator assesses sufficient clinical capacity to respond to cases most likely to lead 
to mortality. It may not be useful in countries with very few ICU beds (can be substituted 
with proportion of occupied hospital beds +/- oxygen in these situations). If this indicator 
is very low, overall health system capacity should be considered limited, regardless of 
adequate levels of other capacity indicators.
Proportion of occupied beds with
access to oxygen supply
Oxygen is an important treatment for COVID-19, and sufficient capacity to provide
oxygen can be useful even in the absence of ICU capacity. This indicator may be difficult 
to measure and may not be useful in countries with very low capacity.
Crude case fatality rate of COVID19
This is an overall impact indicator of adequate COVID-19 care. It is highly dependent on 
age, other risk factors and various reporting biases.3 Analysis of trends should consider 
any changes in case detection or testing strategy. Countries are advised to collect 
additional information on age, as this measure will be heavily affected by the age 
structure of the population.
Number of contact tracers per 100
000 population [alternatively per
number of new cases in a week]
This indicates capacity to conduct sufficient contact tracing to interrupt transmission. It is 
an input indicator that may not correlate well with actual contact tracing outcomes. There 
is minimal evidence base for determining thresholds. This may be difficult to accurately 
measure where contact tracing is done by persons other than formally designated “contact 
tracers”.
Number of points of entry
surveillance officers per 100 000
daily travellers
This is a measure of the ability to successfully mitigate the risk of importation. It is a poor 
indicator of actual internal domestic capacity; is minimally relevant during widespread 
community transmission; and may be achieved when human resources are inappropriately 
diverted from internal domestic use.
Proportion of newly confirmed or
probable cases interviewed for
contact elicitation within 24 hours
of identification
This indicator measures the timeliness of contact listing, which shortens exposure to
potentially infected persons. A better metric of contact listing timeliness is the actual
proportion of contacts identified and traced/quarantined within 48 hours.
Proportion of contacts of new 
cases who are monitored for 14 
days (or locally specified period)
This indicates that contacts are monitored until no longer at risk for becoming secondary
cases (linked to a particular source case). This indicator may be particularly important for 
assessment of public health system performance in the imported/sporadic and clusters 
transmission scenarios. It can be spuriously inflated by poor contact listing.
Proportion of identified cases
isolated within 24 hours of positive
test result (or determination as a
probable case)
This indicates that investigation and isolation of new cases is sufficiently rapid to
minimize the generation of secondary cases. This indicator may be particularly important 
for assessment of public health system performance in the imported/sporadic and clusters 
transmission scenarios.
Time from symptom onset to case
confirmation
This measures the ability of the surveillance system to promptly detect, test and confirm 
symptomatic cases. Individual components (i.e., time from symptom onset to detection, 
detection to testing and test turnaround time) can also be measured independently.
Proportion of cases arising from
contact lists
This describes the extent to which new cases are already captured by and known to the
surveillance system through adequate case investigation. When this is low, it suggests
widespread existence of “hidden” chains of transmission and/or poor-quality case
investigation.
Number and proportion of samples 
sequenced
Wherever resources allow, laboratories could consider genomic sequencing of SARSCoV-2 PCR-positive sentinel specimens.
*This list should not be considered exhaustive.
i ‘Clinically vulnerable’ in this context refers to individuals aged ≥ 60 years and/or with comorbidities that increase risk of 
serious COVID-19 disease, including heart disease, asthma and diabetes.
Considerations for implementing a risk-based approach to international travel in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance
-25-
References
1. World Health Organization. Critical preparedness, readiness and response actions for COVID-19 [Internet]. [cited 2021 
May 3]. Available from: https://www.who.int/publications-detail-redirect/critical-preparedness-readiness-and-responseactions-for-covid-19
2. Megan O’Driscoll, Carole Harry, Christl A Donnelly, Anne Cori, Ilaria Dorigatti, A comparative analysis of statistical
methods to estimate the reproduction number in emerging epidemics with implications for the current COVID-19
pandemic, Clinical Infectious Diseases, 2020; ciaa1599, https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciaa1599
3. World Health Organization. Estimating mortality from COVID-19: scientific brief, 4 August 2020 [Internet]. Geneva: 
World Health Organization; 2020. Available from: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/333642
4. World Health Organization, United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). Monitoring COVID-19 vaccination: 
considerations for the collection and use of vaccination data: interim guidance, 3 March 2021 [Internet]. Geneva: World 
Health Organization; 2021. Available from: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/339993
5. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Interim guidance on the benefits of full vaccination against 
COVID-19 for transmission and implications for non-pharmaceutical interventions [Internet]. European Centre for 
Disease Prevention and Control. 2021 [cited 2021 May 3]. Available from: https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/publicationsdata/interim-guidance-benefits-full-vaccination-against-covid-19-transmission
Acknowledgments
This document was developed in consultation with:
The Strategic and Technical Advisory Group for Infectious Hazards (STAG-IH): Juliet Bedford, Delia Enria, Johan Giesecke, 
David Heymann, Chikwe Ihekweazu, Gary Kobinger, Clifford Lane, Ziad Memish, Myoung-don Oh, Amadou Alpha Sall, Anne 
Schuchat, Kumnuan Ungchusak and Lothar Wieler
The Epidemiology Technical Advisory Group: Gabriel Leung, Richard Hatchet, Neil Ferguson, Vernon Lee, David Heymann, 
Olivia Tulloch, Paul Fine, Ibrahim Abubakar, John Amuasi, Ximena Aguilera, A. Pillay, Marc Lipsitch, Nada Melhem
From the World Health Organization: Abdinasir Abubakar, Jennifer Addo, Maya Allan, Brett Archer, Lisa Askie, Sara Barragan 
Montes, Jessica Barry, David Bennitz, Richard John Brennan, Nilesh Buddh, Finlay Campbell, Ishata Nannie M. Conteh, Carmen 
Dolea, Ute Enderlein, Ann Fortin, Melinda Frost, Thomas Grein, Abdou Salam Gueye, Maung Maung Hitke, Yuka Jinnai, 
Masaya Kato, Mika Kawano, Maria van Kerkhove, Franciscus Konings, Abdi Rahman Mahamud, Emmanuel Onuche Musa, 
Pierre Nabeth, Patricia Ndumbi Ngamala, Nsenga Ngoy, Nam Phuong Nguyen, Dorit Nitzan, Babatunde Olowokure, Boris 
Pavlin, Ihor Perehinets, Emilie Peron, Olivier le Polain, Nataschja Ratanoprayul, Dalia Samhouri, Tanja Schmidt, Catherine 
Smallwood, Mary Stephen, Ambrose Talisuna, Jos Vandelaer, Katelijn Vandemaele, Ninglan Wang, Roland Kimbi Wango,
Pushpa Wijesinghe and Zabulon Yoti.
From the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) / WHO Regional Office of the Americas (AMRO): Sylvain Aldighieri, 
Roberta Andraghetti, Lionel Gresh, Ludovic Reveiz, Jairo Andres Mendez Rico, Ian Stein and Ciro Ugarte Casafranca.
The WHO Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization (SAGE), the SAGE Working Group and the WHO 
International Working Group on Ethics and COVID-19 were also consulted for the update to this document.
WHO continues to monitor the situation closely for any changes that may affect this interim guidance. Should any factors change,
WHO will issue a further update. Otherwise, this interim guidance document will expire two years after the date of publication.
© World Health Organization 2021. Some rights reserved. This work is available under the CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO licence.
WHO reference number: WHO/2019-nCoV/Adjusting_PH_measures/2021.1
-1-
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health 
workers
Interim guidance
2 February 2021
Introduction
This document is an update of the World Health Organization (WHO) interim guidance, Coronavirus disease (COVID19) outbreak: rights, roles and responsibilities of health workers, including key considerations for occupational safety 
and health, from 18 March 2020 (1). This version, which is based on new and emerging evidence, provides guidance 
on occupational health and safety measures for health workers and occupational health services in the context of the 
COVID-19 pandemic. It also updates the rights and responsibilities for health and safety at work for health workers
according to the standards of the International Labour Organization (ILO).
This document complements and should be used in conjunction with the following WHO interim guidance. Prevention, 
identification and management of health worker infection in the context of COVID-19 from 30 October 2020, which
provides recommendations for post-exposure risk assessment and management of infections in health workers (2), and 
Health workforce policy and management in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic response from 3 December 2020,
which contains strategic policy recommendations for health workforce planning, support and capacity-building (3).
This guidance was developed on the basis of a review of existing WHO and ILO guidance documents, rapid reviews of 
evidence about occupational risks that have been amplified by the COVID-19 pandemic and expert opinion from an 
independent international group of experts. It is intended for employers and health-facility managers, health workers 
and their representatives, occupational health and safety experts, infection prevention and control experts in public and 
private health facilities and policy-makers at national and subnational levels
Key points
• Health workers should continue to enjoy their right to decent, healthy and safe working conditions in 
the context of COVID-19.
• Primary prevention of COVID-19 among health workers should be based on risk assessment and 
introduction of appropriate measures.
• Other occupational risks amplified by the COVID-19 pandemic, including violence, harassment, 
stigma, discrimination, heavy workload and prolonged use of personal protective equipment (PPE) 
should be addressed.
• Occupational health services, mental health and psychosocial support, adequate sanitation, hygiene and 
rest facilities should be provided to all health workers.
• Health-care facilities should have occupational health programmes in conjunction with programmes for 
infection prevention and control.
• Employers have the overall responsibility to ensure that all necessary preventive and protective 
measures are taken to minimize occupational risks to health workers.
• Health workers are responsible for following established rules for the protection of their health and 
safety at work.
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-2-
Background
Health workersi may be exposed to occupational hazards that put them at risk of disease, injury and even death in the 
context of the COVID-19 response. These occupational risks include (a) occupational infections with COVID-19; (b)
skin disorders and heat stress from prolonged use of PPE; (c) exposures to toxins because of increased use of 
disinfectants; (d) psychological distress; (e) chronic fatigue; and (f) stigma, discrimination, physical and psychological 
violence and harassment (4).
Mitigating these hazards and protecting the health, safety and well-being of health workers requires well-coordinated
and comprehensive measures for infection prevention and control, occupational health and safety, health workforce 
management and mental health and psychosocial support (4). Insufficient occupational health and safety measures can 
result in increased rates of work-related illness among health workers, high rates of absenteeism, reduced productivity 
and diminished quality of care (5).
Occupational infections 
Occupational exposure to SARS-CoV-2
The WHO interim guidance Mask use in the context of COVID-19 from 1 December 2020 compiles the available 
evidence on the transmission of SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19 (6). According to this evidence, SARSCoV-2 mainly spreads between people when an infected is in close contact with another person. The virus can spread 
from an infected person’s mouth or nose in small liquid particles ranging from larger ‘respiratory droplets’ to smaller 
‘aerosols’ when the person coughs, sneezes, sings, breathes heavily or talks. Close range contact can result in inhalation 
of, or inoculation with, the virus though the mouth, nose or eyes. 
Aerosol transmission can occur in specific situations in which medical procedures that generate aerosols are performed. 
There is inconclusive evidence about aerosol transmission in health-care settings in the absence of aerosol generating 
procedures (6).
There is limited evidence of transmission through fomites (objects or materials that may be contaminated with viable 
virus, such as utensils, furniture, stethoscopes or thermometers) in the immediate environment around an infected person. 
Such transmission may occur through touching the fomites followed by touching the mouth, nose or eyes (6).
There is emerging evidence of transmission in settings outside of medical facilities, such as indoor, crowded, and 
inadequately ventilated spaces, where infected persons spend long periods of time with others. This suggests the 
possibility of aerosol transmission in addition to droplet and fomite transmission (6).
Health workers’ occupational exposure to SARS-CoV-2 can occur any time in health-care facilities and in the 
community, during work-related travel to an area with local community transmission and on the way to and from the 
workplace. A systematic review suggests that occupational risk for health workers can increase in certain clinical settings 
or with suboptimal hand hygiene, long working hours, or improper or suboptimal use or non-availability of PPE (7).
Workplace risk assessment for SARS-CoV-2
The potential for health workers’ occupational exposure to SARS-CoV-2 can be determined by the likelihood of coming 
into direct, indirect or close contact with a person infected with the virus. This includes direct physical contact or care, 
contact with contaminated surfaces and objects, through aerosol-generating procedures on patients with COVID-19
without adequate personal protection, or working with infected people in indoor, crowded places with inadequate 
ventilation (6). The risk of occupational exposure increases with the level of community transmission of SARS-CoV-2
(8).
Employers, in consultation with health workers and their representatives, and with support from experts in infection 
prevention and control (IPC) and occupational health, should carry out and regularly update a workplace risk assessment 
for SARS-CoV-2. The purpose is to determine the level of risk for potential occupational exposure related to different 
jobs, work tasks and work settings; and to plan and implement adequate measures for risk prevention and mitigation
and for assessing the fitness for work, and return to work, of individual health workers (9).
i Health workers are all people engaged in work actions whose primary intent is to improve health. This includes health service providers, such 
as doctors, nurses, midwives, public health professionals, lab-, health- and medical and non-medical technicians, personal care workers, 
community health workers, healers and some practitioners of traditional medicine. It also includes health management and support workers, such 
as cleaners, drivers, hospital administrators, district health managers and social workers, and other occupational groups in health-related 
activities. Health workers include not only those who work in acute care facilities but also those employed in long-term care, public health, 
community-based care, social care and home care and other occupations in the health and social work sectors as defined by the International 
Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic Activities (ISIC), revision 4, section Q: Human health and social work activities.
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-3-
The following workplace risk levels may be useful for employers and occupational health services when carrying out 
rapid risk assessments for potential occupational exposureii to SARS-CoV-2 for different jobs or tasks (10).
1. Lower risk − jobs or tasks without frequent, close contact with the public or others and that do not require contact 
with people known or suspected of being infected with SARS-CoV-2 (9).
2. Medium risk − jobs or tasks with close frequent contact with patients, visitors, suppliers and co-workers but that do 
not require contact with people known or suspected of being infected with SARS-CoV-2 (8).
3. High risk − jobs or tasks with high potential for close contact with people who are known to be or suspected of 
being infected with SARS-CoV-2 or contact with objects and surfaces possibly contaminated with the virus (9).
4. Very high risk − jobs and tasks with risk of exposure to aerosols containing SARS-CoV-2, in settings where aerosolgenerating procedures are regularly performed on patients with COVID-19 or working with infected people in 
indoor, crowded places without adequate ventilation (6).
Levels of workplace risk, even in the same work setting, may vary based on health worker tasks and roles. Therefore, a 
workplace risk assessment should be carried out for each specific setting, as well as for each role, task or set of tasks. 
The risk assessment should lead to prevention and mitigation measures to avoid exposure based on the level of risk, 
bearing in mind the local epidemiological situation, the specificity of the work setting and work tasks, the hierarchy of 
controls and the level of adherence to IPC measures (11, 12). The above-mentioned workplace risk levels can also be 
useful to identify priority groups as COVID-19 vaccine deployment is planned (13).
Table 1 gives examples of job tasks and measures for prevention and mitigation of health worker exposure to SARSCoV-2 based on risk level, in accordance with the WHO guidance and recommendations for IPC and occupational health 
in the context of COVID-19 (6, 9, 11, 12, 14, 15).
Table 1. Workplace risk levels, job tasks and corresponding measures for primary prevention and mitigation of 
occupational exposure to SARS-CoV-2 among health workers
Risk level Examples of job tasks Sample prevention and mitigation measuresiii
Lower risk
(caution) 
Administrative tasks that do not 
involve contact with patients and
visitors or close contact with other 
co-workers. For example, 
telehealth services, remote 
interviewing of suspected or 
confirmed COVID-19 patients or 
their contacts, working in 
individual or low-density offices.
Health facilities:
• organize remote work and teleservices, wherever possible 
and appropriate;
• provide natural or mechanical ventilation without 
recirculation;
• organize regular environmental clean-up and disinfection;
• introduce measures for avoiding crowding and social 
mixing and encourage workers to observe safe physical 
distancing;
• introduce measures preventing the sharing of work stations 
and equipment;
• establish flexible sick leave policies.
Workers:
• stay home if unwell;
• observe hand and respiratory hygiene;
• use fabric masks in common areas and face-to-face 
meetings.
ii In these risk levels, persons referred to as “known to be or suspected of being infected with SARS-CoV-2” may include pre-symptomatic or 
asymptomatic persons who may be infected but do not have obvious signs or symptoms.
iii For details see the following WHO interim guidance documents: Considerations for public health and social measures in the workplace in the 
context of COVID-19, 10 May 2020 (9); Infection prevention and control during health care when coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is suspected 
or confirmed, 29 June 2020 (11); Rational use of personal protective equipment for coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and considerations during 
severe shortages, 23 December 2020 (12); Clinical management of COVID-19, 27 May 2020 (14); COVID-19: Recommendations for heating, 
ventilation, and air conditioning in health care facilities, 21 May 2020 (15); Mask use in the context of COVID-19, 1 December 2020 (6).
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-4-
Risk level Examples of job tasks Sample prevention and mitigation measuresiii
Medium 
risk 
Jobs or tasks with close frequent 
contact with patients, visitors, 
suppliers and co-workers but that 
do not require contact with people 
known or suspected of being 
infected with SARS-CoV-2. In 
settings with known or suspected 
community transmission of 
SARS-CoV-2, this risk level may 
apply to workers who have 
frequent and close work-related 
contact with other people within a 
health-care facility or in the 
community where safe physical 
distance may be difficult to 
maintain. In settings without 
community transmission, this 
scenario may include close 
frequent contact with people 
coming from areas with known or 
suspected community 
transmission.
Health facilities:
• consider alternatives to face-to-face outpatient visits using 
telehealth services wherever feasible and appropriate;
• provide sneeze screens, barriers, workplace modifications
and natural or mechanical ventilation without recirculation;
• organize screening and triage for early recognition of 
patients with suspected COVID-19 and rapid 
implementation of source control measures;
• organize regular environmental clean-up and disinfection;
• introduce measures to avoid crowding and social mixing,
such as restricting visitors and designating areas where 
patients are not allowed;
• encourage workers to observe safe physical distancing 
when not wearing PPE (e.g. in break rooms and cafeterias);
• provide IPC training and adequate PPE in sufficient 
quantity and quality;
• establish flexible sick leave policies.
Workers:
• stay home if unwell;
• observe hand and respiratory hygiene;
• wear medical masks and other PPE according to their tasks 
and apply standard precautions in providing patient care.
Patients, visitors and suppliers:
• observe hand and respiratory hygiene;
• in settings with community or cluster transmission, wear 
medical or fabric masks.
High risk Clinical triage with in-person 
interviewing of patients with signs 
and symptoms of COVID-19;
cleaning areas for screening and 
isolation; entering rooms or 
isolation areas occupied by 
patients with known or suspected 
COVID-19; conducting a physical 
examination and providing direct 
care not involving aerosolgenerating procedures for patients
with known or suspected COVID19; manipulation of respiratory 
samples; handling respiratory 
secretions, saliva or waste from 
COVID-19 patients;
transportation of people known or 
suspected of having COVID-19 
without physical separation 
between the driver and the 
passenger; cleaning between 
transports of patients with 
suspected COVID-19.
Health facilities:
• implement engineering, environmental and administrative 
controls for IPC, and provide adequate PPE in sufficient 
quantity and quality;
• provide enhanced ventilation without recirculation, with 
“clean to less clean” directional design for airflows;
• organize regular environmental clean-up and disinfection;
• introduce measures for avoiding crowding and social 
mixing and restricting non-essential workers and visitors;
• provide regular IPC training, including on the use of PPE;
• establish flexible sick leave policies.
Workers and caregivers:
• use PPE based on transmission-based precautions (medical 
mask, gown, gloves, eye protection) and apply standard 
precautions in providing patient care;
• stay home if unwell;
• observe hand and respiratory hygiene.
Patients, visitors and suppliers:
• wear medical or fabric masks;
• observe hand and respiratory hygiene.
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-5-
Risk level Examples of job tasks Sample prevention and mitigation measuresiii
Very high 
risk 
Work with COVID-19 patients 
where aerosol-generating 
procedures (e.g. tracheal 
intubation, non-invasive 
ventilation, tracheotomy, 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation, 
manual ventilation before 
intubation, sputum induction, 
bronchoscopy, autopsy 
procedures, dental procedures that 
use spray-generating equipment)
are frequently performed; work 
with infected people in indoor, 
crowded places without adequate 
ventilation.
Health facilities:
• implement engineering, environmental and administrative 
controls for IPC and provide adequate PPE in sufficient 
quantity and quality;
• provide mechanical ventilation with high efficiency 
particulate air (HEPA) filters without recirculation;
• introduce measures for avoiding crowding and social 
mixing and for restricting access of non-essential workers
and visitors;
• provide regular IPC training, and training in donning and 
doffing PPE;
• establish flexible sick leave policies.
Workers:
• stay home if unwell;
• observe hand and respiratory hygiene;
• use PPE (respirator N95 or FFP2 or FFP3, gown, gloves, 
eye protection, apron) and apply standard precautions in 
providing patient care.
IPC: infection prevention and control; PPE: personal protective equipment.
Transparent and timely dissemination of information on the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in health facilities and in the 
community should be an integral part of primary prevention in all risk categories.
Some health workers may be at higher risk of developing severe COVID-19 illness because of older age, pre-existing 
medical conditions or pregnancy (14). Such workers should not be required to carry out tasks with medium, high or very 
high risk levels in accordance with WHO recommendations (3).
Some health workers, especially those who are students, volunteers, interns, newly-graduated or are returning to the 
workplace after time away, may be at greater individual risk because they are unfamiliar with IPC procedures or make
errors while practising newly acquired skills. Appropriate task delegation and role assignment should be considered, 
with provisions for regular supportive supervision in line with WHO and ILO recommendations (3, 16).
All health facilities should consult with experts to assess the effectiveness of their ventilation systems. Any decision on 
whether to use natural, hybrid (mixed-mode) or mechanical ventilation should consider: the climate, including prevalent 
wind direction; the floor plan; and, the need for and cost of the ventilation system (15). Aerosol-generating procedures 
should be performed in rooms with appropriate special air exchange capacities and considerations (11).
Health workers should be encouraged to report if they have had occupational or non-occupational exposure to COVID19 without adequate protection. Such exposures should be investigated, assessed and managed case by case using the 
WHO recommended protocol (17). Follow-up actions for managing the infection and return to work should be decided 
in line with WHO recommendations for prevention, identification and management of health worker infections (2).
Other occupational infections 
While providing care to COVID-19 patients and delivering essential health services, health workers may be exposed to 
other infectious hazards, such as bloodborne pathogens and tuberculosis. Therefore, the prevention and control of 
occupational infections among health workers requires a comprehensive approach, bearing in mind the hierarchy of 
controls and close collaboration between occupational health services and IPC programmes staffed with trained 
professionals (2, 18, 19).Box 1 sets out the hierarchy of hazard controls to prevent occupational infections.
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-6-
Box 1. Hierarchy of hazard controls to prevent occupational infections
Measures for the prevention of occupational infections should aim to align with the hierarchy of controls commonly 
used for preventing exposures to occupational hazards. The hierarchy of controls gives priority to highly effective 
measures, such as protection of all workers through engineering and administrative control, instead of relying only 
on measures dependent on individual behaviour, such as adherence to personal protection (20).
a) Hazard elimination. Eliminating exposure to the infectious hazard in the working environment is the most 
effective control. This may be through working remotely, provision of telehealth services from individual 
offices or teleconferencing. 
b) Engineering/environmental controls. If the hazard cannot be eliminated from the workplace, measures 
should be taken to avoid or reduce the spread of the pathogen and its concentration in the work 
environment. For example, through adapted structural design conducive to patient flow and spatial 
separation for isolating patients, and design and repurposing of wards (11, 21). Adequate ventilation, 
sanitation practices and infrastructure, ‘touch-free’ technology, sneeze guards and barriers, safer needle 
devices and safe health-care waste management are other critical elements (22, 23).
c) Administrative controls. Measures may need to be taken to change the way people work such as: restricting 
workplace access to essential workers with specific training and skills for protection; ensuring appropriate 
working hours; rostering and, where possible, avoiding workers being shifted from high to low transmission 
settings. 
Other helpful controls include the addition of surge personnel to meet work demands; rest breaks; time off 
between shifts; appropriate task delegation; supportive supervision; ‘just-in-time’ and refresher training on 
IPC practices; procedures for monitoring performance and giving feedback (24); paid sick and holiday 
leave; and, policies for workers to stay home if unwell, or in self-quarantine and self-isolation, without loss 
of income.
d) Optimal use of PPE. Measures should be in place to protect individual health workers from exposure, 
including provision of adequate and appropriately fitted PPE based on risk assessment, the type of 
procedure to be performed and the risk of infection during a procedure. Appropriate training and 
monitoring on proper use and disposal of PPE is also important (12). The PPE used for protection against 
occupational infections should comply with standard technical specifications (25).
In all patient care settings, standard precautions should be applied to reduce the risk of transmission of bloodborne and 
other pathogens from both recognized and unrecognized sources in accordance with WHO recommendations (26).
During the COVID-19 pandemic, health workers should continue to receive recommended vaccinations as specified in 
the national immunization programme and WHO recommendations (27). WHO also recommends that health workers 
be encouraged to take a seasonal influenza vaccine (28).
Prolonged use of PPE
In principle, PPE is intended to be used for short periods of time when the exposure to hazard cannot be avoided or 
otherwise controlled. In the context of COVID-19, heavy workload, patient flows and shortages of PPE may require 
health workers to wear PPE for extended periods of time. 
Research suggests that prolonged use of gloves and frequent hand hygiene may cause or aggravate existing hand eczema
(29). If a health worker has a latex allergy, use of non-latex or nitrile gloves is advised. Frequent application of 
moisturizing creams is a good practice to decrease hand irritation. Products containing petroleum can damage the 
integrity of latex gloves and should be avoided for skin care (30). Health workers with sustained rashes or inflammatory 
skin symptoms should be referred to medical care.
There is evidence that prolonged use of PPE for respiratory and eye protection (masks, respirators and goggles) can also 
cause skin damage: itching, rash, acne, pressure injury, contact dermatitis, urticaria and aggravation of pre-existing skin 
diseases(31). To decrease the risk of skin damage, it is a good practice to provide health workers with properly fitted 
PPE, to avoid sustained friction or pressure on the same site; to apply moisturizers or gel before wearing facial protective 
equipment to lubricate and reduce friction between skin and masks or goggles; and to avoid using over-tight goggles,
which can damage the skin and generate fogging (31).
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-7-
Prolonged use of full PPE (gowns, masks, head coverings, coveralls) traps heat and sweat, limits evaporative cooling of 
the body and can lead to heat stress (heat rash, muscle cramps, fainting, exhaustion, breakdown of skeletal muscle and 
heat stroke) (32). Coveralls, double layering of gowns, shoe protection, or hoods that cover the head and neck such as 
those used in the context of filovirus disease outbreaks (e.g. Ebola virus), are not required when caring for patients with 
COVID-19 (12).
WHO and the ILO recommend that health workers at risk of heat stress should be advised to monitor for symptoms of 
heat-related illness, including monitoring the colour and volume of urine output (33). The time spent in full PPE should 
be limited and rest should be arranged in a cool area. Sufficient safe and cool drinking-water should be provided to all 
health workers. 
Use of disinfectants
The increased use of disinfectants in health facilities and in public places may cause toxic effects among health workers, 
cleaners and sanitation workers. Nasal and eye irritation, chest tightness, wheezing, difficulty breathing, and skin 
irritation may result. Disinfectant solutions must be prepared and used according to the manufacturer’s 
recommendations in well-ventilated areas, avoiding mixing of different disinfectants. 
Health workers involved in the preparation and application of disinfectants should be evaluated for medical 
contraindications, trained in the safe use of disinfectants, provided with adequate PPE and instructed in its proper use. 
WHO does not recommend spraying individuals with disinfectants (such as in a tunnel, cabinet or chamber) under any 
circumstances (22).
Workload, work time and work organization
During the COVID-19 pandemic, health workers may be working long hours with heavier workloads and insufficient 
time for rest and recuperation. These demands can result in chronic fatigue and lack of energy, with decreased alertness, 
coordination and efficiency; increased reaction time; impaired cognition and emotional blunting or mood changes. 
Strategic health-workforce planning, support and capacity-building are required to ensure safe staffing levels, fair 
allocation of workloads, and management of working time and work organization according to recommendations in the 
WHO interim guidance, Health workforce policy and management in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic response,
from 3 December 2020 (3).
In the case of a declared public emergency, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, exceptions to the provisions on normal 
working hours should be authorized only temporarily in accordance with ILO recommendations (34). Measures should 
be taken for the optimal organization of working hours, shifts and rests, as practically feasible, based on the local 
situation (Box 2).
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-8-
Box 2. WHO and ILO recommendations for prevention of fatigue during an emergency situation
Shift lengths. Five 8-hour shifts, or four 10-hour shifts, per week are usually tolerable. Longer shifts represent a risk 
factor for fatigue. Depending on the workload, 12-hour days may require more frequent interspersed rest days. 
During the evening and night, shorter shifts (e.g. eight hours) are better tolerated than longer shifts. Fatigue is 
intensified by night work because of night-time drowsiness and inadequate daytime sleep (33). Preference should be 
given to shift rotation in a forward direction (morning to afternoon to night), bearing in mind workers’ preferences 
and local conditions (35).
Workload. Balance shifts of lighter and heavier work tasks. Examine work demands with respect to shift length. 
Twelve-hour shifts are more tolerable for ‘lighter’ tasks (e.g. desk work). Shorter work shifts help counteract 
fatigue from highly intense work, physical exertion, extreme environments or exposure to other health or safety
hazards(33).
Rest and recuperation. Establish policies regarding duration of working hours and rest breaks (e.g. at least 10 
consecutive hours per day of protected time off to obtain 7−8 hours of sleep, and 48 hours off after 14 
consecutive days of work). Providing frequent brief rest breaks (e.g. every 1−2 hours) during demanding work is
more effective against fatigue than a few longer breaks. Allow longer breaks for meals. Plan one or two full days of 
rest to follow five consecutive 8-hour shifts or four 10-hour shifts. Consider two rest days after three consecutive 
12-hour shifts (33).
As necessary, and if possible, provide accommodation for health workers during emergency operations with access 
to food services or ready-to-eat meals, sanitary facilities and recreational opportunities, while maintaining physical 
distancing and other public health measures to prevent COVID-19 (33).
Violence, harassment, discrimination and stigma
Incidents of violence and harassmentiv against health workers have been increasing during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
The most widespread risk factors for workplace violence in the health sector include stress and fatigue, long patient 
waiting times, crowding, the burden of transmitting negative prognoses, COVID-19-specific prevention and control 
measures (such as placing individuals in quarantine or isolation facilities), contact tracing or not allowing access to the 
bodies of deceased loved ones. These can all lead to additional tensions and violence (36).
Because of their proximity to potentially infected people, health workers may also be seen as infection threats within 
the community and thus face stigma and discrimination. Health workers are at risk of violence and harassment at the 
workplace as well as on their way to and from work and in the community (37). Wearing work clothes, or other signs 
that make health workers easy to identify, may increase the risk of experiencing stigma, discrimination or violence and 
harassment by the public (37).
Workplace violence and harassment has been shown to have negative effects on the organization of health services and 
retainment of staff, the mental and physical well-being of health practitioners and the quality of health-care delivery. A 
systematic review (38) found that health workers in service delivery roles, such as nurses, first responders, emergency 
room staff and physicians, and those working long hours or night shifts, are at higher risk. Male providers are slightly 
more likely to become victims of physical violence, while female providers have a higher risk of exposure to sexual 
harassment and sexual violence. Health workers from ethnic minorities and other minority groups might be particularly 
at risk.
Violence, harassment, discrimination and stigma against health workers should be prevented and eliminated as much as 
possible. Some countries have introduced specific legislation, for example by criminalizing such acts and providing
regulatory protection for health workers, to prevent and eliminate violence and harassment and retaliation against health 
workers (39). National governments and local authorities can adopt community-engagement and communication 
initiatives and behavioural standards, to prevent stigmatization of health workers at the workplace and in the community 
thereby promoting public respect and recognition of the role of health workers (40). Box 3 sets out international 
recommendations for addressing this issue.
iv The Violence and Harassment Convention, 2019 (No. 190) defines “violence and harassment” in the world of work as “a range of 
unacceptable behaviours and practices, or threats thereof, whether a single occurrence or repeated, that aim at, result in, or are likely to result in 
physical, psychological, sexual or economic harm, and includes gender-based violence and harassment”. The Convention also establishes the 
responsibilities of national authorities and employers respectively.
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-9-
Box 3. International recommendations for addressing workplace violence and harassment in the health 
sector (41, 42)
• Design, implement and monitor a workplace policy to prevent and combat violence, harassment, 
discrimination and stigma with the participation of workers and their representatives, and ensure that all 
staff, including management, are aware of it and abide by it.
• Establish procedures to prohibit discrimination and harassment and promote fair treatment of workers.
• Provide security briefings and personnel in high-risk areas.
• Undertake initiatives to raise awareness and provide training on violence and harassment.
• Provide timely and accurate information to staff and patients to reduce uncertainty and distress.
• Streamline patient flow and avoid crowding and waiting times.
• Ensure safe access to and from the workplace and easily-identified emergency exits.
• Provide alarm systems (e.g. panic buttons, telephone, beeper, short-wave radio) where risk is anticipated.
• Have protocols in place for reporting, investigating and responding to incidents of violence, stigma and 
discrimination in a blame-free environment.
• Introduce measures to protect complainants, victims, witnesses and whistle-blowers against victimization or 
retaliation and ensure confidentiality is protected.
• Provide confidential assistance, counselling and support to victims of violence, harassment and stigma. 
• Regularly assess the risk of violence and harassment in consultation with workers and their representatives.
• Avoid wearing uniforms or other clinical attire while commuting to work and when visiting public places, 
households or the community for non-professional reasons.
Mental health and psychosocial support
In addition to the pressures mentioned above, a systematic review (43) found that health workers’ mental health and 
well-being can be affected in the context of COVID-19. This can be caused by contact with affected patients, perceived 
impediments to doing their jobs, insufficient organizational support, forced redeployment to jobs with higher levels of 
risk, lack of confidence in protective measures and working as a nurse.
Personal risk factors for health workers’ mental health include lower levels of education, inadequate training, less 
clinical experience, working as a part-time employee, increased time in quarantine, social isolation, having children at 
home, lower household income, younger age, female sex, comorbid physical health conditions and the impact of the 
pandemic on their personal lifestyle.
Lower perceived personal self-efficacy and a history of psychological distress, mental health disorders or substance 
abuse, are further risk factors. These risks make health workers vulnerable to common mental health conditions 
including anxiety, depression and insomnia (33, 43). Mental health issues can contribute to reduced performance, 
absence, staff resignations or higher turnover, a reduction in efficiency and increased possibility of human error, which 
may pose a threat to both health workers and patient safety (44).
The WHO interim guidance, Health workforce policy and management in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic 
response, from 3 December 2020, specifies interventions to support health workers’ mental health issues at the 
individual level (3). According to international recommendations by WHO and others, the following additional measures 
should be considered for protecting mental health in the workplace.
• Implement surveillance measures to detect critical incidents and mitigate their impact on the mental health of 
health workers (33, 43).
• Ensure that quality communication and accurate information updates are provided to all health workers, and
rotate workers from higher-stress to lower-stress functions (44).
• Partner inexperienced workers with experienced colleagues and ensure that outreach personnel enter the 
community in pairs (45).
• Ensure availability of and facilitate access to confidential mental health and psychosocial support services for 
health workers, including remotely-provided or on-site services (12).
• Provide mechanisms for early and confidential identification and management of anxiety, depression and other 
mental health conditions, and initiate psychosocial support strategies and first-line interventions (12).
• Promote a mental health prevention culture among health workers and health managers (12).
• Ensure health workers who develop mental health conditions and seek help can return to their work without 
stigma or discrimination (45).
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-10-
Sanitation, hygiene and rest facilities
Functioning hand hygiene facilities should be present for all health workers at all points of care: in designated areas 
where PPE is put on or taken off; in toilets and rooms for personal and menstrual hygiene, and where health-care waste 
is handled. Ensure availability of hand-washing facilities with clean running water and hand hygiene products (soap, 
single-use clean towels). Alcohol-based hand rubs containing 60−80% alcohol should be available at all points of care. 
Access to rest and relaxation rooms, safe drinking-water, toilets, supplies for personal and menstrual hygiene, and food 
and rest opportunities should all be available during work shifts (46). These areas should allow for safe physical 
distancing and adequate ventilation (3).
Designated rooms should be set aside for health workers providing toilets and space for personal and menstrual hygiene; 
these should be separate from those used by patients and visitors. There should be a bin for disposal of waste products,
or an area for washing re-usable materials, and a space for women to wash themselves with privacy (3).
There should be daily cleaning protocols to ensure workplace, workstations, equipment and facilities are clean and tidy
and a system for disposing of bin contents and disinfecting the bins (34).
In some situations, the provision of temporary accommodation (hotels/motels, trailers or tents) may be needed between 
shifts for rest and hygiene. Food service, childcare and recreational opportunities can facilitate personnel availability,
decrease exposure to infection in families and the community, and alleviate stress and fatigue (17).
Facilities should be provided at the workplace for health workers to change into and out of work clothing, so they do 
not need to wear it when commuting (46). Professional laundering of work clothes worn at the bedside, that come into
contact with the patient or patient environment, should be organized by the health facility (47).
Occupational health services
Every health-care facility should have an occupational health programme, as articulated in the WHO/ILO global 
framework for occupational health programmes for health workers, and a designated and appropriately trained focal 
point for occupational health and safety (48). Large health-care facilities should have a labour-management committee 
for health and safety at work and an occupational health service with essential preventive functions (49).
In the context of COVID-19, occupational health service focal points should collaborate closely with IPC programmes 
to institute IPC policies and procedures in accordance with the WHO interim guidance, Prevention, identification and 
management of health worker infection in the context of COVID-19, from 30 October 2020 (2). In addition, focal points 
and occupational health services should:
• carry out regular workplace risk assessments for exposure to other risks for health and safety at work amplified 
by the COVID-19 pandemic and assess the effectiveness of preventive measures;
• provide instructions and training to workers on how to work in a healthy and safe way, including prevention of 
violence and stigma, safe use of disinfectants and protection of mental health and psychological well-being;
• advise on additional measures for control and mitigation of other physical, chemical, ergonomic and radiation 
hazards based on risk assessment;
• identify priority groups of health workers for COVID-19 vaccination and other immunizations based on 
workplace risk assessment and medical conditions;
• organize immunization campaigns and recording of vaccination status;
• organize health surveillance of workers engaged in jobs and tasks with an elevated risk of exposure to SARSCoV-2 and other occupational hazards;
• monitor reporting and participate in the investigation of cases of exposure to SARS-CoV-2 and accidental 
exposure to other pathogens, needlesticks and other sharps, accidents and incidents of violence and harassment
and develop measures for prevention;
• advise on the procurement of safer technical devices and adequate PPE;
• organize the monitoring of health workers for COVID-19 symptoms, testing and provision of expert advice to 
health workers on issues related to exposure and their health;
• ensure workers’ representatives are consulted on all aspects of occupational safety and health associated with 
their work to enhance cooperation between management and workers;
• collaborate with facility focal points for infection prevention and control, patient safety and human resources;
• advise on the provision of suitable facilities for health workers to shower and change from work clothing to day 
wear.
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-11-
Health workers should be evaluated confidentially by medical professionals for fitness for duty to carry out certain jobs 
and tasks, and for any impairment that may pose increased risk of illness or injury from exposures at work. In the context 
of COVID-19, certain workers need special consideration. These include:
• older health workers and those with pre-existing medical conditions or who are pregnant and may be at higher 
risk of developing serious illness;
• workers with mental health conditions that can deteriorate from additional distress, such as tending to a high 
number of severely ill and dying patients;
• workers with increased workload, prolonged hours or concern for their own or a family member’s health.
Occupational health services should organize a health assessment for any worker who self-identifies as fitting into one 
of the above categories. An assessment should also be done in the following situations: a change of job, work tasks or 
work setting; before workers are assigned roles with COVID-19 patients; and on resumption of work after a prolonged 
absence for health reasons. Periodic assessments, particularly for the development of skin and mental health disorders 
and other work-related health problems, are advised for all staff.
Duties, rights and responsibilities for health and safety at work
Employer responsibilities
According to international labour standards, employers have the overall responsibility for ensuring that all necessary
preventive and protective measures are taken to minimize occupational risks (50). Keeping this in mind, in the context 
of COVID-19, employers of health workers should:
• consult with health workers and their representatives on the occupational safety and health aspects of their work
and the risks of exposure and adopt adequate preventive and mitigation measures, avoiding the creation of new
sources of risk;
• ensure timely access to information and transparent dialogue between health workers and employers, including
sharing of the most recent information on clinical protocols, guidelines, measures and decisions to ensure 
effective implementation, as well as on workplace situations that expose health workers to risks;
• provide information, instruction and training on occupational safety and health, including refresher training in 
IPC, and the correct use, donning, doffing and disposal of PPE;
• provide adequate IPC and PPE supplies in sufficient quantity and quality and at no cost to any worker;
• maintain supply chain management of PPE supplies;
• provide personnel with timely technical updates on COVID-19 and appropriate tools to assess, triage, test and
treat patients, and share IPC information with patients and the public;
• provide appropriate security measures as needed for personal safety;
• ensure a blame-free environment in which health workers can report on hazardous, stigmatizing or violent 
incidents related to work and adopt measures for immediate follow-up, including support to victims;
• advise health workers on health self-assessment, symptom reporting and policies for staying home if unwell or 
in quarantine;
• maintain appropriate working hours with breaks and rest periods in accordance with national law;
• allow health workers to exercise the right to remove themselves from a work situation that they have reasonable 
justification to believe presents an imminent and serious danger to their life or health, and protect health workers 
exercising this right from any undue consequences;
• notify the competent authority of cases of occupational injuries and diseases, in accordance with national law;
• consider providing access to mental health support and counselling resources;
• promote cooperation between management and health workers and their representatives;
• ensure health workers are covered with employment injury benefits in line with national law.
Whenever two or more employers or entities engage in activities simultaneously in one work setting, they should 
collaborate on occupational safety and health, without prejudice to the responsibility of each for the health and safety 
of its employees (51).
Health worker rights and responsibilities
Health workers are entitled to decent work, which entails dignity, equality, a fair income and safe working conditions. 
In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, along with the right to safe workplaces, health workers have duties and 
responsibilities regarding the protection of health and safety at work under international labour standards (52), and to 
follow WHO recommendations for patient safety (53). These include:
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-12-
• following established occupational safety and health procedures, avoiding exposing themselves or others to 
health and safety risks and participating in employer-provided occupational safety and health training;
• using provided protocols to assess, triage and treat patients;
• swiftly following established public health reporting procedures for suspected and confirmed cases;
• treating patients with respect and compassion, conferring dignity and maintaining patient confidentiality;
• providing or reinforcing accurate IPC and public health information to patients and the public;
• putting on, using, taking off and disposing of PPE correctly;
• self-monitoring for signs and symptoms of COVID-19, and reporting any unprotected occupational and nonoccupational exposure to SARS-CoV-2 to the focal point for occupational health or the occupational health 
service, and self-quarantining;
• advising the occupational health service if they are experiencing signs of undue stress or mental health 
challenges that may require supportive interventions;
• reporting to their immediate supervisor any situation they have reasonable justification to believe presents an 
imminent and serious danger to life or health.
Responsibilities of national authorities
Besides their duties and responsibilities as employers in publicly provided health services, national authorities should 
ensure that all health workers involved in the COVID-19 response, regardless of their employment status and mode of 
practice, have access to coverage for medical care and sickness benefits, including for testing and treatment of COVID19, quarantine and isolation in line with national laws (52).
National authorities must ensure that health workers, especially those at medium, high and very high risk of infection,
regardless of their mode of practice, have early access to COVID-19 vaccination programmes (13). They should also 
ensure that all health workers are covered by schemes for employment injury benefits according to national regulations 
(54). National authorities should ensure and facilitate access to medical care for health workers infected with COVID19.
COVID-19, if contracted as a result of work, could be considered as a work or employment injury (54). Such cases 
should be investigated and reported to the public authority responsible for managing employment injury benefits
according to national regulations. Countries should consider updating their lists of occupational diseases, exposure 
criteria and reporting in the context of COVID-19 (55).
Health workers who are infected by COVID-19 as a result of their work – and in case the infection is considered an 
occupational disease or injury in line with national law – should be entitled to health care, and to the extent that they are 
incapacitated for work, cash benefits or compensation. Dependent family members of health workers who die from 
COVID-19 contracted in the course of work-related activities, should be entitled to cash benefits or compensation as 
well as to a funeral grant or benefit (52).
References
1. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak: rights, roles and responsibilities of health workers, including key 
considerations for occupational safety and health. Interim guidance, 18 March 2020. Geneva: World Health 
Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/coronavirus-disease-(covid-19)-outbreak-rights-roles-andresponsibilities-of-health-workers-including-key-considerations-for-occupational-safety-and-health, accessed 
20 November 2020).
2. Prevention, identification and management of health worker infection in the context of COVID-19. Interim 
guidance, 30 October 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/10665-
336265, accessed 20 November 2020).
3. Health workforce policy and management in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic response. Interim guidance,
3 December 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/healthworkforce-policy-and-management-in-the-context-of-the-covid-19-pandemic-response, accessed 10 December 
2020).
4. WHO calls for healthy, safe and decent working conditions for all health workers, amidst COVID-19 pandemic. 
Geneva: World Health Organization; 28 April 2020 (https://www.who.int/news/item/28-04-2020-who-calls-forhealthy-safe-and-decent-working-conditions-for-all-health-workers-amidst-covid-19-pandemic, accessed 20 
November 2020).
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-13-
5. ILO Policy Brief on COVID-19. Pillar 3: Protecting workers in the workplace. Geneva: International Labour 
Organization; 2020 (https://www.ilo.org/global/topics/coronavirus/impacts-and-responses/WCMS_739049/lang--
en/index.htm, accessed 20 November 2020).
6. Mask use in the context of COVID-19. Interim guidance, 1 December 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization 
(https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/337199, accessed 20 December 2020).
7. Chou R, Dana T, Buckley DI, Selph S, Fu Rongwei, Totten AM. Epidemiology of and risk factors for coronavirus 
infection in health care workers: A living rapid review. Ann Intern Med. 2020 Jul 21;173(2):120-136. 
https://doi.org/10.7326/M20-1632. Epub 2020 May 5. PMID: 32369541; PMCID: PMC7240841.
8. Critical preparedness, readiness and response actions for COVID-19. Interim guidance, 4 November 2020. 
Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/critical-preparedness-readiness-andresponse-actions-for-covid-19, accessed 20 November 2020).
9. Considerations for public health and social measures in the workplace in the context of COVID-19. Annex to:
Considerations in adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 10 May 2020 (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/considerations-for-public-health-and-socialmeasures-in-the-workplace-in-the-context-of-covid-19, accessed 20 November 2020).
10. Guidance on preparing workplaces for COVID-19. Washington DC: Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration, U.S. Department of Labor; 2020 (https://www.osha.gov/Publications/OSHA3990.pdf, accessed 
20 November 2020).
11. Infection prevention and control during health care when coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is suspected or 
confirmed. Interim guidance, 29 June 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization 
(https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-2019-nCoV-IPC-2020.4 accessed 20 November 2020).
12. Rational use of personal protective equipment for coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and considerations during 
severe shortages. Interim guidance, 23 December 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization 
(https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/rational-use-of-personal-protective-equipment-for-coronavirus-disease-
(covid-19)-and-considerations-during-severe-shortages, accessed 29 December 2020).
13. Guidance on developing a national deployment and vaccination plan for COVID-19 vaccines. Interim guidance,
16 November 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization 
(https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/336603/WHO-2019-nCoV-Vaccine_deployment-2020.1-
eng.pdf, accessed 20 November 2020).
14. Clinical management of COVID-19. Interim guidance, 27 May 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization 
(https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/clinical-management-of-severe-acute-respiratory-infection-when-novelcoronavirus-(ncov)-infection-is-suspected, accessed 20 November 2020).
15. COVID-19: Recommendations for heating, ventilation, and air conditioning in health care facilities. Washington 
DC: Pan American Health Organization; 21 May 2020 (https://www.paho.org/en/documents/covid-19-
recommendations-heating-ventilation-and-air-conditioning-health-care-facilities, accessed 20 November 2020).
16. ILO sectoral brief: COVID-19 and the health sector. Geneva: International Labour Organization; 11 April 2020
(https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_dialogue/---sector/documents/briefingnote/wcms_741655.pdf,
accessed 20 November 2020).
17. Risk assessment and management of exposure of health care workers in the context of COVID-19. Interim 
guidance, 19 March 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/331496,
accessed 20 November 2020).
18. Minimum requirements for infection prevention and control programmes. Geneva: World Health Organization;
2019 (https://www.who.int/infection-prevention/publications/MinReq-Manual_2019.pdf?ua=1, accessed 20 
November 2020).
19. Infection prevention and control health-care facility response for COVID-19: A module from the suite of health 
service capacity assessments in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. Interim guidance, 20 October 2020. 
Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-2019-nCoVHCF_assessment-IPC-2020.1, accessed 20 November 2020).
20. Liberati EG, Peerally MF, Dixon-Woods M. Learning from high risk industries may not be straightforward: a 
qualitative study of the hierarchy of risk controls approach in healthcare. International Journal for Quality in 
Health Care. 2018 Feb;30(1):39-43. https://doi.org/10.1093/intqhc/mzx163 
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-14-
21. Severe acute respiratory infections treatment centre: practical manual to set up and manage a SARI treatment 
centre and a SARI screening facility in health care facilities. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020 
(https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/331603, accessed 20 November 2020).
22. Cleaning and disinfection of environmental surfaces in the context of COVID-19. Interim guidance, 16 May 2020. 
Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/cleaning-and-disinfection-ofenvironmental-surfaces-inthe-context-of-covid-19, accessed 20 November 2020).
23. Ensuring a safe environment for patients and staff in COVID-19 health-care facilities: A module from the suite of 
health service capacity assessments in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. Interim guidance, 20 October 
2020. Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-2019-nCoVHCF_assessment-Safe_environment-2020.1, accessed 20 November 2020).
24. Administrative controls to guarantee implementation of infection prevention and control measures in the context 
of COVID-19. Washington DC: Pan American Health Organization; 18 June 2020 
(https://iris.paho.org/handle/10665.2/52389, accessed 20 November 2020).
25. Technical specifications of personal protective equipment for COVID-19. Interim guidance, 13 November 2020. 
Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-2019-nCoVPPE_specifications-2020.1, accessed 20 November 2020).
26. Infection control standard precautions in health care: aide memoire. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2006 
(https://www.who.int/csr/resources/publications/4EPR_AM2.pdf, accessed 20 November 2020).
27. Table 4: Summary of WHO position papers – Immunization of health care workers. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; September 2020 (https://www.who.int/immunization/policy/Immunization_routine_table4.pdf,
accessed 20 November 2020).
28. How to implement seasonal influenza vaccination of health workers. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2019 
(https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/325906/9789241515597-eng.pdf?ua=1, accessed 20 November 
2020).
29. MacGibeny MA, Wassef C. Preventing adverse cutaneous reactions from amplified hygiene practices during the 
COVID-19 pandemic: how dermatologists can help through anticipatory guidance. Arch Dermatol Res. (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00403-020-02086-x
30. Yan Y, Chen H, Chen L, Cheng B, Diao P, Dong L, et al. Consensus of Chinese experts on protection of skin and 
mucous membrane barrier for health-care workers fighting against coronavirus disease 2019. Dermatologic 
Therapy. 2020 Jul;33(4):e13310. https://doi.org/10.1111/dth.13310.
31. Gefen A, Ousey K. Update to device-related pressure ulcers: SECURE prevention. COVID-19, face masks and 
skin damage. Journal of Wound Care. 2020;29(5). https://doi.org/10.12968/jowc.2020.29.5.245.
32. Jacklitsch B, Williams WJ, Musolin K, Coca A, Kim J-H, Turner N. NIOSH criteria for a recommended standard. 
Occupational exposure to heat and hot environments. Revised criteria 2016. Cincinnati, OH, USA: Department of 
Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Institute for Occupational 
Safety and Health (NIOSH); 2016 (https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/2016-106/pdfs/2016-
106.pdf?id=10.26616/NIOSHPUB2016106, accessed 20 November 2020).
33. Occupational safety and health in public health emergencies: a manual for protecting health workers and 
responders. Geneva: World Health Organization and International Labour Organization; 2018 
(https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/occupational-safety-and-health-in-public-health-emergencies-a-manualfor-protecting-health-workers-and-responders, accessed 20 November 2020).
34. Guidelines on decent work in public emergency services. Geneva: International Labour Organization; 2019 
(https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_dialogue/---
sector/documents/normativeinstrument/wcms_626551.pdf, accessed 20 November 2020).
35. Health services. Decent working time for nursing personnel: Critical for worker well-being and quality care: 
policy brief. Geneva: International Labour Organization; 2018 (https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---
ed_dialogue/---sector/documents/publication/wcms_655277.pdf, accessed 20 November 2020).
36. Forgione Paola. New patterns of violence against healthcare in the covid-19 pandemic. BMJ Opinion. 15 May 
2020. (https://blogs.bmj.com/bmj/2020/05/15/new-patterns-of-violence-against-healthcare-in-the-covid-19-
pandemic/, accessed 20 November 2020).
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-15-
37. Attacks on health care in the context of COVID-19. In WHO newsroom [website]. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2020 (https://www.who.int/news-room/feature-stories/detail/attacks-on-health-care-in-the-contextof-covid-19, accessed 20 November 2020).
38. Liu J, Gan Y, Jiang H, Li L, Dwyer R, Lu K, et al. Prevalence of workplace violence against healthcare workers: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Occup Environ Med. 2019 Dec;76(12):927-937. PMID: 31611310.
39. Safe and healthy working environments free from violence and harassment. Geneva: International Labour 
Organization; 2020 (https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_protect/---protrav/---
safework/documents/publication/wcms_751832.pdf, accessed 20 December 2020).
40. Social Stigma associated with COVID-19. A guide to preventing and addressing social stigma. Geneva: 
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, United Nations Children’s Fund and World 
Health Organization; 24 February 2020
(https://www.unicef.org/media/65931/file/Social%20stigma%20associated%20with%20the%20coronavirus%20di
sease%202019%20(COVID-19).pdf, accessed 20 November 2020).
41. Framework guidelines for addressing workplace violence in the health sector. Geneva: International Labour 
Office, International Council of Nurses, World Health Organization, Public Services International; 2002 
(https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_dialogue/---
sector/documents/normativeinstrument/wcms_160908.pdf, accessed 20 November 2020).
42. C190 – Violence and Harassment Convention, 2019 (No.190). In: ILO Normlex [website]. Geneva: International 
Labour Organization
(https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:C190, accessed 
20 December 2020).
43. Kisely S, Warren N, McMahon L, Dalais C, Henry I, Siskind D. Occurrence, prevention, and management of the 
psychological effects of emerging virus outbreaks on healthcare workers: rapid review and meta-analysis. BMJ 
2020;369:m1642. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.m1642
44. Mental health and psychosocial considerations during the COVID-19 outbreak. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 18 March 2020 (https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/mental-healthconsiderations.pdf?sfvrsn=6d3578af_10, accessed 20 November 2020).
45. Addressing mental health and psychosocial aspects of COVID-19 outbreak: interim briefing note, version 1.5. 
Geneva: Inter-Agency Standing Committee; February 2020
(https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/system/files/2020-
11/IASC%20Interim%20Briefing%20Note%20on%20COVID19%20Outbreak%20Readiness%20and%20Response%20Operations%20-%20MHPSS_3.pdf, accessed 20 
November 2020).
46. Water, sanitation, hygiene, and waste management for SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19. Interim 
guidance, 29 July 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization and United Nations Children’s Fund 
(https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-2019-nCoV-IPC-WASH-2020.4, accessed 20 November 2020).
47. Bearman G, Bryant K, Leekha S, Mayer J, Silvia Munoz-Price L, Murthy R, et al. Expert guidance: Healthcare 
personnel attire in non-operating-room settings. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2014 Feb;35(2):107-121. 
https://doi.org/10.1086/675066. 
48. Caring for those who care. National programmes for occupational health for health workers. Policy brief. Geneva: 
World Health Organization and International Labour Organization; 2020 
(https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/caring-for-those-who-care, accessed 20 November 2020).
49. C161 − Occupational Health Services Convention, 1985 (No. 161). In: ILO Normlex [website]. Geneva: 
International Labour Organization 
(https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:C161, accessed 
20 November 2020).
50. C155 − Occupational Safety and Health Convention, 1981 (No. 155). In: ILO Normlex [website]. Geneva: 
International Labour Organization 
(https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:C155, accessed 
20 November 2020).
51. R164 − Occupational Safety and Health Recommendation, 1981 (No. 164). In: ILO Normlex [website]. Geneva: 
International Labour Organization 
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-16-
(https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:R164, accessed 
20 November 2020).
52. ILO Standards and COVID-19 (coronavirus). FAQ. Geneva: International Labour Organization; 29 May 2020 
(https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_norm/---
normes/documents/genericdocument/wcms_739937.pdf, accessed 20 November 2020).
53. Health worker safety: a priority for patient safety. Charter: World Patient Safety Day, 17 September 2020. 
Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/world-patient-safety-day/healthworker-safety-charter-wpsd-17-september-2020-3-1.pdf?sfvrsn=2cb6752d_2, accessed 20 November 2020).
54. C121 – Employment Injury Benefits Convention, 1964 [Schedule I amended in 1980] (No.121). In: Normlex 
[website]. Geneva: International Labour Organization 
(https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:C121, accessed 
24 January 2021).
55. ILO List of Occupational Diseases (revised 2010). Geneva: International Labour Organization; 2010 
(https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_protect/---protrav/---
safework/documents/publication/wcms_125137.pdf, accessed 24 January 2021).
Acknowledgements
The following experts participated in the development of this document.
WHO Secretariat: Rola Al-Emam, Benedetta Allegranzi, Yonah (Eric) Amster, Gwen Brachman, Alessandro 
Cassini, Giorgio Cometto, Shalini Desai, Neelam Dhingra-Kumar, Ivan D. Ivanov, Dorota Jarosinska, Catherine Kane, 
Berit Kieselbach, Aiysha Malik, Guy Mbayo, Madison Moon, Maria Neira, Lesley Onyon, Gene Peralta, Julietta 
Rodriguez-Guzman, Alice Simniceanu, Victoria Willet. 
ILO: Magdalena Bober, Halim Hamzaoui, Maren Hopfe, Ursula Kulke, Franklin Muchiri, Joaquim Pintado Nunes, 
Christiane Wiskow.
External Guideline Development Group: Gehad Abo El-Lata, Cairo University, Egypt; Baba Aye, Public Services 
International, France; Claudio Colosio, University of Milano, Italy; John Conly, University of Calgary, Canada; 
Samuel Harvey, Black Dog Institute, Australia; Maria Clara Padoveze, University of São Paulo, Brazil; Fiona Potter, 
Institution of Occupational Safety and Health, United Kingdom; Annalee Yassi, University of British Columbia, 
Canada; Min Zhang, Peking Union Medical College, China. 
WHO and the ILO continue to monitor the situation closely. Should any factors change that may affect this interim 
guidance, WHO and the ILO will issue a further update. Otherwise, this document will expire 2 years after the date of 
publication.
© World Health Organization and International Labour Organization, 2021
Some rights reserved. This work is available under the CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO licence.
WHO reference number: WHO/2019-nCoV/HCW_advice/2021.1
-1-
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health 
workers
Interim guidance
2 February 2021
Introduction
This document is an update of the World Health Organization (WHO) interim guidance, Coronavirus disease (COVID19) outbreak: rights, roles and responsibilities of health workers, including key considerations for occupational safety 
and health, from 18 March 2020 (1). This version, which is based on new and emerging evidence, provides guidance 
on occupational health and safety measures for health workers and occupational health services in the context of the 
COVID-19 pandemic. It also updates the rights and responsibilities for health and safety at work for health workers
according to the standards of the International Labour Organization (ILO).
This document complements and should be used in conjunction with the following WHO interim guidance. Prevention, 
identification and management of health worker infection in the context of COVID-19 from 30 October 2020, which
provides recommendations for post-exposure risk assessment and management of infections in health workers (2), and 
Health workforce policy and management in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic response from 3 December 2020,
which contains strategic policy recommendations for health workforce planning, support and capacity-building (3).
This guidance was developed on the basis of a review of existing WHO and ILO guidance documents, rapid reviews of 
evidence about occupational risks that have been amplified by the COVID-19 pandemic and expert opinion from an 
independent international group of experts. It is intended for employers and health-facility managers, health workers 
and their representatives, occupational health and safety experts, infection prevention and control experts in public and 
private health facilities and policy-makers at national and subnational levels
Key points
• Health workers should continue to enjoy their right to decent, healthy and safe working conditions in 
the context of COVID-19.
• Primary prevention of COVID-19 among health workers should be based on risk assessment and 
introduction of appropriate measures.
• Other occupational risks amplified by the COVID-19 pandemic, including violence, harassment, 
stigma, discrimination, heavy workload and prolonged use of personal protective equipment (PPE) 
should be addressed.
• Occupational health services, mental health and psychosocial support, adequate sanitation, hygiene and 
rest facilities should be provided to all health workers.
• Health-care facilities should have occupational health programmes in conjunction with programmes for 
infection prevention and control.
• Employers have the overall responsibility to ensure that all necessary preventive and protective 
measures are taken to minimize occupational risks to health workers.
• Health workers are responsible for following established rules for the protection of their health and 
safety at work.
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-2-
Background
Health workersi may be exposed to occupational hazards that put them at risk of disease, injury and even death in the 
context of the COVID-19 response. These occupational risks include (a) occupational infections with COVID-19; (b)
skin disorders and heat stress from prolonged use of PPE; (c) exposures to toxins because of increased use of 
disinfectants; (d) psychological distress; (e) chronic fatigue; and (f) stigma, discrimination, physical and psychological 
violence and harassment (4).
Mitigating these hazards and protecting the health, safety and well-being of health workers requires well-coordinated
and comprehensive measures for infection prevention and control, occupational health and safety, health workforce 
management and mental health and psychosocial support (4). Insufficient occupational health and safety measures can 
result in increased rates of work-related illness among health workers, high rates of absenteeism, reduced productivity 
and diminished quality of care (5).
Occupational infections 
Occupational exposure to SARS-CoV-2
The WHO interim guidance Mask use in the context of COVID-19 from 1 December 2020 compiles the available 
evidence on the transmission of SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19 (6). According to this evidence, SARSCoV-2 mainly spreads between people when an infected is in close contact with another person. The virus can spread 
from an infected person’s mouth or nose in small liquid particles ranging from larger ‘respiratory droplets’ to smaller 
‘aerosols’ when the person coughs, sneezes, sings, breathes heavily or talks. Close range contact can result in inhalation 
of, or inoculation with, the virus though the mouth, nose or eyes. 
Aerosol transmission can occur in specific situations in which medical procedures that generate aerosols are performed. 
There is inconclusive evidence about aerosol transmission in health-care settings in the absence of aerosol generating 
procedures (6).
There is limited evidence of transmission through fomites (objects or materials that may be contaminated with viable 
virus, such as utensils, furniture, stethoscopes or thermometers) in the immediate environment around an infected person. 
Such transmission may occur through touching the fomites followed by touching the mouth, nose or eyes (6).
There is emerging evidence of transmission in settings outside of medical facilities, such as indoor, crowded, and 
inadequately ventilated spaces, where infected persons spend long periods of time with others. This suggests the 
possibility of aerosol transmission in addition to droplet and fomite transmission (6).
Health workers’ occupational exposure to SARS-CoV-2 can occur any time in health-care facilities and in the 
community, during work-related travel to an area with local community transmission and on the way to and from the 
workplace. A systematic review suggests that occupational risk for health workers can increase in certain clinical settings 
or with suboptimal hand hygiene, long working hours, or improper or suboptimal use or non-availability of PPE (7).
Workplace risk assessment for SARS-CoV-2
The potential for health workers’ occupational exposure to SARS-CoV-2 can be determined by the likelihood of coming 
into direct, indirect or close contact with a person infected with the virus. This includes direct physical contact or care, 
contact with contaminated surfaces and objects, through aerosol-generating procedures on patients with COVID-19
without adequate personal protection, or working with infected people in indoor, crowded places with inadequate 
ventilation (6). The risk of occupational exposure increases with the level of community transmission of SARS-CoV-2
(8).
Employers, in consultation with health workers and their representatives, and with support from experts in infection 
prevention and control (IPC) and occupational health, should carry out and regularly update a workplace risk assessment 
for SARS-CoV-2. The purpose is to determine the level of risk for potential occupational exposure related to different 
jobs, work tasks and work settings; and to plan and implement adequate measures for risk prevention and mitigation
and for assessing the fitness for work, and return to work, of individual health workers (9).
i Health workers are all people engaged in work actions whose primary intent is to improve health. This includes health service providers, such 
as doctors, nurses, midwives, public health professionals, lab-, health- and medical and non-medical technicians, personal care workers, 
community health workers, healers and some practitioners of traditional medicine. It also includes health management and support workers, such 
as cleaners, drivers, hospital administrators, district health managers and social workers, and other occupational groups in health-related 
activities. Health workers include not only those who work in acute care facilities but also those employed in long-term care, public health, 
community-based care, social care and home care and other occupations in the health and social work sectors as defined by the International 
Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic Activities (ISIC), revision 4, section Q: Human health and social work activities.
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-3-
The following workplace risk levels may be useful for employers and occupational health services when carrying out 
rapid risk assessments for potential occupational exposureii to SARS-CoV-2 for different jobs or tasks (10).
1. Lower risk − jobs or tasks without frequent, close contact with the public or others and that do not require contact 
with people known or suspected of being infected with SARS-CoV-2 (9).
2. Medium risk − jobs or tasks with close frequent contact with patients, visitors, suppliers and co-workers but that do 
not require contact with people known or suspected of being infected with SARS-CoV-2 (8).
3. High risk − jobs or tasks with high potential for close contact with people who are known to be or suspected of 
being infected with SARS-CoV-2 or contact with objects and surfaces possibly contaminated with the virus (9).
4. Very high risk − jobs and tasks with risk of exposure to aerosols containing SARS-CoV-2, in settings where aerosolgenerating procedures are regularly performed on patients with COVID-19 or working with infected people in 
indoor, crowded places without adequate ventilation (6).
Levels of workplace risk, even in the same work setting, may vary based on health worker tasks and roles. Therefore, a 
workplace risk assessment should be carried out for each specific setting, as well as for each role, task or set of tasks. 
The risk assessment should lead to prevention and mitigation measures to avoid exposure based on the level of risk, 
bearing in mind the local epidemiological situation, the specificity of the work setting and work tasks, the hierarchy of 
controls and the level of adherence to IPC measures (11, 12). The above-mentioned workplace risk levels can also be 
useful to identify priority groups as COVID-19 vaccine deployment is planned (13).
Table 1 gives examples of job tasks and measures for prevention and mitigation of health worker exposure to SARSCoV-2 based on risk level, in accordance with the WHO guidance and recommendations for IPC and occupational health 
in the context of COVID-19 (6, 9, 11, 12, 14, 15).
Table 1. Workplace risk levels, job tasks and corresponding measures for primary prevention and mitigation of 
occupational exposure to SARS-CoV-2 among health workers
Risk level Examples of job tasks Sample prevention and mitigation measuresiii
Lower risk
(caution) 
Administrative tasks that do not 
involve contact with patients and
visitors or close contact with other 
co-workers. For example, 
telehealth services, remote 
interviewing of suspected or 
confirmed COVID-19 patients or 
their contacts, working in 
individual or low-density offices.
Health facilities:
• organize remote work and teleservices, wherever possible 
and appropriate;
• provide natural or mechanical ventilation without 
recirculation;
• organize regular environmental clean-up and disinfection;
• introduce measures for avoiding crowding and social 
mixing and encourage workers to observe safe physical 
distancing;
• introduce measures preventing the sharing of work stations 
and equipment;
• establish flexible sick leave policies.
Workers:
• stay home if unwell;
• observe hand and respiratory hygiene;
• use fabric masks in common areas and face-to-face 
meetings.
ii In these risk levels, persons referred to as “known to be or suspected of being infected with SARS-CoV-2” may include pre-symptomatic or 
asymptomatic persons who may be infected but do not have obvious signs or symptoms.
iii For details see the following WHO interim guidance documents: Considerations for public health and social measures in the workplace in the 
context of COVID-19, 10 May 2020 (9); Infection prevention and control during health care when coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is suspected 
or confirmed, 29 June 2020 (11); Rational use of personal protective equipment for coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and considerations during 
severe shortages, 23 December 2020 (12); Clinical management of COVID-19, 27 May 2020 (14); COVID-19: Recommendations for heating, 
ventilation, and air conditioning in health care facilities, 21 May 2020 (15); Mask use in the context of COVID-19, 1 December 2020 (6).
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-4-
Risk level Examples of job tasks Sample prevention and mitigation measuresiii
Medium 
risk 
Jobs or tasks with close frequent 
contact with patients, visitors, 
suppliers and co-workers but that 
do not require contact with people 
known or suspected of being 
infected with SARS-CoV-2. In 
settings with known or suspected 
community transmission of 
SARS-CoV-2, this risk level may 
apply to workers who have 
frequent and close work-related 
contact with other people within a 
health-care facility or in the 
community where safe physical 
distance may be difficult to 
maintain. In settings without 
community transmission, this 
scenario may include close 
frequent contact with people 
coming from areas with known or 
suspected community 
transmission.
Health facilities:
• consider alternatives to face-to-face outpatient visits using 
telehealth services wherever feasible and appropriate;
• provide sneeze screens, barriers, workplace modifications
and natural or mechanical ventilation without recirculation;
• organize screening and triage for early recognition of 
patients with suspected COVID-19 and rapid 
implementation of source control measures;
• organize regular environmental clean-up and disinfection;
• introduce measures to avoid crowding and social mixing,
such as restricting visitors and designating areas where 
patients are not allowed;
• encourage workers to observe safe physical distancing 
when not wearing PPE (e.g. in break rooms and cafeterias);
• provide IPC training and adequate PPE in sufficient 
quantity and quality;
• establish flexible sick leave policies.
Workers:
• stay home if unwell;
• observe hand and respiratory hygiene;
• wear medical masks and other PPE according to their tasks 
and apply standard precautions in providing patient care.
Patients, visitors and suppliers:
• observe hand and respiratory hygiene;
• in settings with community or cluster transmission, wear 
medical or fabric masks.
High risk Clinical triage with in-person 
interviewing of patients with signs 
and symptoms of COVID-19;
cleaning areas for screening and 
isolation; entering rooms or 
isolation areas occupied by 
patients with known or suspected 
COVID-19; conducting a physical 
examination and providing direct 
care not involving aerosolgenerating procedures for patients
with known or suspected COVID19; manipulation of respiratory 
samples; handling respiratory 
secretions, saliva or waste from 
COVID-19 patients;
transportation of people known or 
suspected of having COVID-19 
without physical separation 
between the driver and the 
passenger; cleaning between 
transports of patients with 
suspected COVID-19.
Health facilities:
• implement engineering, environmental and administrative 
controls for IPC, and provide adequate PPE in sufficient 
quantity and quality;
• provide enhanced ventilation without recirculation, with 
“clean to less clean” directional design for airflows;
• organize regular environmental clean-up and disinfection;
• introduce measures for avoiding crowding and social 
mixing and restricting non-essential workers and visitors;
• provide regular IPC training, including on the use of PPE;
• establish flexible sick leave policies.
Workers and caregivers:
• use PPE based on transmission-based precautions (medical 
mask, gown, gloves, eye protection) and apply standard 
precautions in providing patient care;
• stay home if unwell;
• observe hand and respiratory hygiene.
Patients, visitors and suppliers:
• wear medical or fabric masks;
• observe hand and respiratory hygiene.
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-5-
Risk level Examples of job tasks Sample prevention and mitigation measuresiii
Very high 
risk 
Work with COVID-19 patients 
where aerosol-generating 
procedures (e.g. tracheal 
intubation, non-invasive 
ventilation, tracheotomy, 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation, 
manual ventilation before 
intubation, sputum induction, 
bronchoscopy, autopsy 
procedures, dental procedures that 
use spray-generating equipment)
are frequently performed; work 
with infected people in indoor, 
crowded places without adequate 
ventilation.
Health facilities:
• implement engineering, environmental and administrative 
controls for IPC and provide adequate PPE in sufficient 
quantity and quality;
• provide mechanical ventilation with high efficiency 
particulate air (HEPA) filters without recirculation;
• introduce measures for avoiding crowding and social 
mixing and for restricting access of non-essential workers
and visitors;
• provide regular IPC training, and training in donning and 
doffing PPE;
• establish flexible sick leave policies.
Workers:
• stay home if unwell;
• observe hand and respiratory hygiene;
• use PPE (respirator N95 or FFP2 or FFP3, gown, gloves, 
eye protection, apron) and apply standard precautions in 
providing patient care.
IPC: infection prevention and control; PPE: personal protective equipment.
Transparent and timely dissemination of information on the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in health facilities and in the 
community should be an integral part of primary prevention in all risk categories.
Some health workers may be at higher risk of developing severe COVID-19 illness because of older age, pre-existing 
medical conditions or pregnancy (14). Such workers should not be required to carry out tasks with medium, high or very 
high risk levels in accordance with WHO recommendations (3).
Some health workers, especially those who are students, volunteers, interns, newly-graduated or are returning to the 
workplace after time away, may be at greater individual risk because they are unfamiliar with IPC procedures or make
errors while practising newly acquired skills. Appropriate task delegation and role assignment should be considered, 
with provisions for regular supportive supervision in line with WHO and ILO recommendations (3, 16).
All health facilities should consult with experts to assess the effectiveness of their ventilation systems. Any decision on 
whether to use natural, hybrid (mixed-mode) or mechanical ventilation should consider: the climate, including prevalent 
wind direction; the floor plan; and, the need for and cost of the ventilation system (15). Aerosol-generating procedures 
should be performed in rooms with appropriate special air exchange capacities and considerations (11).
Health workers should be encouraged to report if they have had occupational or non-occupational exposure to COVID19 without adequate protection. Such exposures should be investigated, assessed and managed case by case using the 
WHO recommended protocol (17). Follow-up actions for managing the infection and return to work should be decided 
in line with WHO recommendations for prevention, identification and management of health worker infections (2).
Other occupational infections 
While providing care to COVID-19 patients and delivering essential health services, health workers may be exposed to 
other infectious hazards, such as bloodborne pathogens and tuberculosis. Therefore, the prevention and control of 
occupational infections among health workers requires a comprehensive approach, bearing in mind the hierarchy of 
controls and close collaboration between occupational health services and IPC programmes staffed with trained 
professionals (2, 18, 19).Box 1 sets out the hierarchy of hazard controls to prevent occupational infections.
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-6-
Box 1. Hierarchy of hazard controls to prevent occupational infections
Measures for the prevention of occupational infections should aim to align with the hierarchy of controls commonly 
used for preventing exposures to occupational hazards. The hierarchy of controls gives priority to highly effective 
measures, such as protection of all workers through engineering and administrative control, instead of relying only 
on measures dependent on individual behaviour, such as adherence to personal protection (20).
a) Hazard elimination. Eliminating exposure to the infectious hazard in the working environment is the most 
effective control. This may be through working remotely, provision of telehealth services from individual 
offices or teleconferencing. 
b) Engineering/environmental controls. If the hazard cannot be eliminated from the workplace, measures 
should be taken to avoid or reduce the spread of the pathogen and its concentration in the work 
environment. For example, through adapted structural design conducive to patient flow and spatial 
separation for isolating patients, and design and repurposing of wards (11, 21). Adequate ventilation, 
sanitation practices and infrastructure, ‘touch-free’ technology, sneeze guards and barriers, safer needle 
devices and safe health-care waste management are other critical elements (22, 23).
c) Administrative controls. Measures may need to be taken to change the way people work such as: restricting 
workplace access to essential workers with specific training and skills for protection; ensuring appropriate 
working hours; rostering and, where possible, avoiding workers being shifted from high to low transmission 
settings. 
Other helpful controls include the addition of surge personnel to meet work demands; rest breaks; time off 
between shifts; appropriate task delegation; supportive supervision; ‘just-in-time’ and refresher training on 
IPC practices; procedures for monitoring performance and giving feedback (24); paid sick and holiday 
leave; and, policies for workers to stay home if unwell, or in self-quarantine and self-isolation, without loss 
of income.
d) Optimal use of PPE. Measures should be in place to protect individual health workers from exposure, 
including provision of adequate and appropriately fitted PPE based on risk assessment, the type of 
procedure to be performed and the risk of infection during a procedure. Appropriate training and 
monitoring on proper use and disposal of PPE is also important (12). The PPE used for protection against 
occupational infections should comply with standard technical specifications (25).
In all patient care settings, standard precautions should be applied to reduce the risk of transmission of bloodborne and 
other pathogens from both recognized and unrecognized sources in accordance with WHO recommendations (26).
During the COVID-19 pandemic, health workers should continue to receive recommended vaccinations as specified in 
the national immunization programme and WHO recommendations (27). WHO also recommends that health workers 
be encouraged to take a seasonal influenza vaccine (28).
Prolonged use of PPE
In principle, PPE is intended to be used for short periods of time when the exposure to hazard cannot be avoided or 
otherwise controlled. In the context of COVID-19, heavy workload, patient flows and shortages of PPE may require 
health workers to wear PPE for extended periods of time. 
Research suggests that prolonged use of gloves and frequent hand hygiene may cause or aggravate existing hand eczema
(29). If a health worker has a latex allergy, use of non-latex or nitrile gloves is advised. Frequent application of 
moisturizing creams is a good practice to decrease hand irritation. Products containing petroleum can damage the 
integrity of latex gloves and should be avoided for skin care (30). Health workers with sustained rashes or inflammatory 
skin symptoms should be referred to medical care.
There is evidence that prolonged use of PPE for respiratory and eye protection (masks, respirators and goggles) can also 
cause skin damage: itching, rash, acne, pressure injury, contact dermatitis, urticaria and aggravation of pre-existing skin 
diseases(31). To decrease the risk of skin damage, it is a good practice to provide health workers with properly fitted 
PPE, to avoid sustained friction or pressure on the same site; to apply moisturizers or gel before wearing facial protective 
equipment to lubricate and reduce friction between skin and masks or goggles; and to avoid using over-tight goggles,
which can damage the skin and generate fogging (31).
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-7-
Prolonged use of full PPE (gowns, masks, head coverings, coveralls) traps heat and sweat, limits evaporative cooling of 
the body and can lead to heat stress (heat rash, muscle cramps, fainting, exhaustion, breakdown of skeletal muscle and 
heat stroke) (32). Coveralls, double layering of gowns, shoe protection, or hoods that cover the head and neck such as 
those used in the context of filovirus disease outbreaks (e.g. Ebola virus), are not required when caring for patients with 
COVID-19 (12).
WHO and the ILO recommend that health workers at risk of heat stress should be advised to monitor for symptoms of 
heat-related illness, including monitoring the colour and volume of urine output (33). The time spent in full PPE should 
be limited and rest should be arranged in a cool area. Sufficient safe and cool drinking-water should be provided to all 
health workers. 
Use of disinfectants
The increased use of disinfectants in health facilities and in public places may cause toxic effects among health workers, 
cleaners and sanitation workers. Nasal and eye irritation, chest tightness, wheezing, difficulty breathing, and skin 
irritation may result. Disinfectant solutions must be prepared and used according to the manufacturer’s 
recommendations in well-ventilated areas, avoiding mixing of different disinfectants. 
Health workers involved in the preparation and application of disinfectants should be evaluated for medical 
contraindications, trained in the safe use of disinfectants, provided with adequate PPE and instructed in its proper use. 
WHO does not recommend spraying individuals with disinfectants (such as in a tunnel, cabinet or chamber) under any 
circumstances (22).
Workload, work time and work organization
During the COVID-19 pandemic, health workers may be working long hours with heavier workloads and insufficient 
time for rest and recuperation. These demands can result in chronic fatigue and lack of energy, with decreased alertness, 
coordination and efficiency; increased reaction time; impaired cognition and emotional blunting or mood changes. 
Strategic health-workforce planning, support and capacity-building are required to ensure safe staffing levels, fair 
allocation of workloads, and management of working time and work organization according to recommendations in the 
WHO interim guidance, Health workforce policy and management in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic response,
from 3 December 2020 (3).
In the case of a declared public emergency, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, exceptions to the provisions on normal 
working hours should be authorized only temporarily in accordance with ILO recommendations (34). Measures should 
be taken for the optimal organization of working hours, shifts and rests, as practically feasible, based on the local 
situation (Box 2).
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-8-
Box 2. WHO and ILO recommendations for prevention of fatigue during an emergency situation
Shift lengths. Five 8-hour shifts, or four 10-hour shifts, per week are usually tolerable. Longer shifts represent a risk 
factor for fatigue. Depending on the workload, 12-hour days may require more frequent interspersed rest days. 
During the evening and night, shorter shifts (e.g. eight hours) are better tolerated than longer shifts. Fatigue is 
intensified by night work because of night-time drowsiness and inadequate daytime sleep (33). Preference should be 
given to shift rotation in a forward direction (morning to afternoon to night), bearing in mind workers’ preferences 
and local conditions (35).
Workload. Balance shifts of lighter and heavier work tasks. Examine work demands with respect to shift length. 
Twelve-hour shifts are more tolerable for ‘lighter’ tasks (e.g. desk work). Shorter work shifts help counteract 
fatigue from highly intense work, physical exertion, extreme environments or exposure to other health or safety
hazards(33).
Rest and recuperation. Establish policies regarding duration of working hours and rest breaks (e.g. at least 10 
consecutive hours per day of protected time off to obtain 7−8 hours of sleep, and 48 hours off after 14 
consecutive days of work). Providing frequent brief rest breaks (e.g. every 1−2 hours) during demanding work is
more effective against fatigue than a few longer breaks. Allow longer breaks for meals. Plan one or two full days of 
rest to follow five consecutive 8-hour shifts or four 10-hour shifts. Consider two rest days after three consecutive 
12-hour shifts (33).
As necessary, and if possible, provide accommodation for health workers during emergency operations with access 
to food services or ready-to-eat meals, sanitary facilities and recreational opportunities, while maintaining physical 
distancing and other public health measures to prevent COVID-19 (33).
Violence, harassment, discrimination and stigma
Incidents of violence and harassmentiv against health workers have been increasing during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
The most widespread risk factors for workplace violence in the health sector include stress and fatigue, long patient 
waiting times, crowding, the burden of transmitting negative prognoses, COVID-19-specific prevention and control 
measures (such as placing individuals in quarantine or isolation facilities), contact tracing or not allowing access to the 
bodies of deceased loved ones. These can all lead to additional tensions and violence (36).
Because of their proximity to potentially infected people, health workers may also be seen as infection threats within 
the community and thus face stigma and discrimination. Health workers are at risk of violence and harassment at the 
workplace as well as on their way to and from work and in the community (37). Wearing work clothes, or other signs 
that make health workers easy to identify, may increase the risk of experiencing stigma, discrimination or violence and 
harassment by the public (37).
Workplace violence and harassment has been shown to have negative effects on the organization of health services and 
retainment of staff, the mental and physical well-being of health practitioners and the quality of health-care delivery. A 
systematic review (38) found that health workers in service delivery roles, such as nurses, first responders, emergency 
room staff and physicians, and those working long hours or night shifts, are at higher risk. Male providers are slightly 
more likely to become victims of physical violence, while female providers have a higher risk of exposure to sexual 
harassment and sexual violence. Health workers from ethnic minorities and other minority groups might be particularly 
at risk.
Violence, harassment, discrimination and stigma against health workers should be prevented and eliminated as much as 
possible. Some countries have introduced specific legislation, for example by criminalizing such acts and providing
regulatory protection for health workers, to prevent and eliminate violence and harassment and retaliation against health 
workers (39). National governments and local authorities can adopt community-engagement and communication 
initiatives and behavioural standards, to prevent stigmatization of health workers at the workplace and in the community 
thereby promoting public respect and recognition of the role of health workers (40). Box 3 sets out international 
recommendations for addressing this issue.
iv The Violence and Harassment Convention, 2019 (No. 190) defines “violence and harassment” in the world of work as “a range of 
unacceptable behaviours and practices, or threats thereof, whether a single occurrence or repeated, that aim at, result in, or are likely to result in 
physical, psychological, sexual or economic harm, and includes gender-based violence and harassment”. The Convention also establishes the 
responsibilities of national authorities and employers respectively.
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-9-
Box 3. International recommendations for addressing workplace violence and harassment in the health 
sector (41, 42)
• Design, implement and monitor a workplace policy to prevent and combat violence, harassment, 
discrimination and stigma with the participation of workers and their representatives, and ensure that all 
staff, including management, are aware of it and abide by it.
• Establish procedures to prohibit discrimination and harassment and promote fair treatment of workers.
• Provide security briefings and personnel in high-risk areas.
• Undertake initiatives to raise awareness and provide training on violence and harassment.
• Provide timely and accurate information to staff and patients to reduce uncertainty and distress.
• Streamline patient flow and avoid crowding and waiting times.
• Ensure safe access to and from the workplace and easily-identified emergency exits.
• Provide alarm systems (e.g. panic buttons, telephone, beeper, short-wave radio) where risk is anticipated.
• Have protocols in place for reporting, investigating and responding to incidents of violence, stigma and 
discrimination in a blame-free environment.
• Introduce measures to protect complainants, victims, witnesses and whistle-blowers against victimization or 
retaliation and ensure confidentiality is protected.
• Provide confidential assistance, counselling and support to victims of violence, harassment and stigma. 
• Regularly assess the risk of violence and harassment in consultation with workers and their representatives.
• Avoid wearing uniforms or other clinical attire while commuting to work and when visiting public places, 
households or the community for non-professional reasons.
Mental health and psychosocial support
In addition to the pressures mentioned above, a systematic review (43) found that health workers’ mental health and 
well-being can be affected in the context of COVID-19. This can be caused by contact with affected patients, perceived 
impediments to doing their jobs, insufficient organizational support, forced redeployment to jobs with higher levels of 
risk, lack of confidence in protective measures and working as a nurse.
Personal risk factors for health workers’ mental health include lower levels of education, inadequate training, less 
clinical experience, working as a part-time employee, increased time in quarantine, social isolation, having children at 
home, lower household income, younger age, female sex, comorbid physical health conditions and the impact of the 
pandemic on their personal lifestyle.
Lower perceived personal self-efficacy and a history of psychological distress, mental health disorders or substance 
abuse, are further risk factors. These risks make health workers vulnerable to common mental health conditions 
including anxiety, depression and insomnia (33, 43). Mental health issues can contribute to reduced performance, 
absence, staff resignations or higher turnover, a reduction in efficiency and increased possibility of human error, which 
may pose a threat to both health workers and patient safety (44).
The WHO interim guidance, Health workforce policy and management in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic 
response, from 3 December 2020, specifies interventions to support health workers’ mental health issues at the 
individual level (3). According to international recommendations by WHO and others, the following additional measures 
should be considered for protecting mental health in the workplace.
• Implement surveillance measures to detect critical incidents and mitigate their impact on the mental health of 
health workers (33, 43).
• Ensure that quality communication and accurate information updates are provided to all health workers, and
rotate workers from higher-stress to lower-stress functions (44).
• Partner inexperienced workers with experienced colleagues and ensure that outreach personnel enter the 
community in pairs (45).
• Ensure availability of and facilitate access to confidential mental health and psychosocial support services for 
health workers, including remotely-provided or on-site services (12).
• Provide mechanisms for early and confidential identification and management of anxiety, depression and other 
mental health conditions, and initiate psychosocial support strategies and first-line interventions (12).
• Promote a mental health prevention culture among health workers and health managers (12).
• Ensure health workers who develop mental health conditions and seek help can return to their work without 
stigma or discrimination (45).
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-10-
Sanitation, hygiene and rest facilities
Functioning hand hygiene facilities should be present for all health workers at all points of care: in designated areas 
where PPE is put on or taken off; in toilets and rooms for personal and menstrual hygiene, and where health-care waste 
is handled. Ensure availability of hand-washing facilities with clean running water and hand hygiene products (soap, 
single-use clean towels). Alcohol-based hand rubs containing 60−80% alcohol should be available at all points of care. 
Access to rest and relaxation rooms, safe drinking-water, toilets, supplies for personal and menstrual hygiene, and food 
and rest opportunities should all be available during work shifts (46). These areas should allow for safe physical 
distancing and adequate ventilation (3).
Designated rooms should be set aside for health workers providing toilets and space for personal and menstrual hygiene; 
these should be separate from those used by patients and visitors. There should be a bin for disposal of waste products,
or an area for washing re-usable materials, and a space for women to wash themselves with privacy (3).
There should be daily cleaning protocols to ensure workplace, workstations, equipment and facilities are clean and tidy
and a system for disposing of bin contents and disinfecting the bins (34).
In some situations, the provision of temporary accommodation (hotels/motels, trailers or tents) may be needed between 
shifts for rest and hygiene. Food service, childcare and recreational opportunities can facilitate personnel availability,
decrease exposure to infection in families and the community, and alleviate stress and fatigue (17).
Facilities should be provided at the workplace for health workers to change into and out of work clothing, so they do 
not need to wear it when commuting (46). Professional laundering of work clothes worn at the bedside, that come into
contact with the patient or patient environment, should be organized by the health facility (47).
Occupational health services
Every health-care facility should have an occupational health programme, as articulated in the WHO/ILO global 
framework for occupational health programmes for health workers, and a designated and appropriately trained focal 
point for occupational health and safety (48). Large health-care facilities should have a labour-management committee 
for health and safety at work and an occupational health service with essential preventive functions (49).
In the context of COVID-19, occupational health service focal points should collaborate closely with IPC programmes 
to institute IPC policies and procedures in accordance with the WHO interim guidance, Prevention, identification and 
management of health worker infection in the context of COVID-19, from 30 October 2020 (2). In addition, focal points 
and occupational health services should:
• carry out regular workplace risk assessments for exposure to other risks for health and safety at work amplified 
by the COVID-19 pandemic and assess the effectiveness of preventive measures;
• provide instructions and training to workers on how to work in a healthy and safe way, including prevention of 
violence and stigma, safe use of disinfectants and protection of mental health and psychological well-being;
• advise on additional measures for control and mitigation of other physical, chemical, ergonomic and radiation 
hazards based on risk assessment;
• identify priority groups of health workers for COVID-19 vaccination and other immunizations based on 
workplace risk assessment and medical conditions;
• organize immunization campaigns and recording of vaccination status;
• organize health surveillance of workers engaged in jobs and tasks with an elevated risk of exposure to SARSCoV-2 and other occupational hazards;
• monitor reporting and participate in the investigation of cases of exposure to SARS-CoV-2 and accidental 
exposure to other pathogens, needlesticks and other sharps, accidents and incidents of violence and harassment
and develop measures for prevention;
• advise on the procurement of safer technical devices and adequate PPE;
• organize the monitoring of health workers for COVID-19 symptoms, testing and provision of expert advice to 
health workers on issues related to exposure and their health;
• ensure workers’ representatives are consulted on all aspects of occupational safety and health associated with 
their work to enhance cooperation between management and workers;
• collaborate with facility focal points for infection prevention and control, patient safety and human resources;
• advise on the provision of suitable facilities for health workers to shower and change from work clothing to day 
wear.
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-11-
Health workers should be evaluated confidentially by medical professionals for fitness for duty to carry out certain jobs 
and tasks, and for any impairment that may pose increased risk of illness or injury from exposures at work. In the context 
of COVID-19, certain workers need special consideration. These include:
• older health workers and those with pre-existing medical conditions or who are pregnant and may be at higher 
risk of developing serious illness;
• workers with mental health conditions that can deteriorate from additional distress, such as tending to a high 
number of severely ill and dying patients;
• workers with increased workload, prolonged hours or concern for their own or a family member’s health.
Occupational health services should organize a health assessment for any worker who self-identifies as fitting into one 
of the above categories. An assessment should also be done in the following situations: a change of job, work tasks or 
work setting; before workers are assigned roles with COVID-19 patients; and on resumption of work after a prolonged 
absence for health reasons. Periodic assessments, particularly for the development of skin and mental health disorders 
and other work-related health problems, are advised for all staff.
Duties, rights and responsibilities for health and safety at work
Employer responsibilities
According to international labour standards, employers have the overall responsibility for ensuring that all necessary
preventive and protective measures are taken to minimize occupational risks (50). Keeping this in mind, in the context 
of COVID-19, employers of health workers should:
• consult with health workers and their representatives on the occupational safety and health aspects of their work
and the risks of exposure and adopt adequate preventive and mitigation measures, avoiding the creation of new
sources of risk;
• ensure timely access to information and transparent dialogue between health workers and employers, including
sharing of the most recent information on clinical protocols, guidelines, measures and decisions to ensure 
effective implementation, as well as on workplace situations that expose health workers to risks;
• provide information, instruction and training on occupational safety and health, including refresher training in 
IPC, and the correct use, donning, doffing and disposal of PPE;
• provide adequate IPC and PPE supplies in sufficient quantity and quality and at no cost to any worker;
• maintain supply chain management of PPE supplies;
• provide personnel with timely technical updates on COVID-19 and appropriate tools to assess, triage, test and
treat patients, and share IPC information with patients and the public;
• provide appropriate security measures as needed for personal safety;
• ensure a blame-free environment in which health workers can report on hazardous, stigmatizing or violent 
incidents related to work and adopt measures for immediate follow-up, including support to victims;
• advise health workers on health self-assessment, symptom reporting and policies for staying home if unwell or 
in quarantine;
• maintain appropriate working hours with breaks and rest periods in accordance with national law;
• allow health workers to exercise the right to remove themselves from a work situation that they have reasonable 
justification to believe presents an imminent and serious danger to their life or health, and protect health workers 
exercising this right from any undue consequences;
• notify the competent authority of cases of occupational injuries and diseases, in accordance with national law;
• consider providing access to mental health support and counselling resources;
• promote cooperation between management and health workers and their representatives;
• ensure health workers are covered with employment injury benefits in line with national law.
Whenever two or more employers or entities engage in activities simultaneously in one work setting, they should 
collaborate on occupational safety and health, without prejudice to the responsibility of each for the health and safety 
of its employees (51).
Health worker rights and responsibilities
Health workers are entitled to decent work, which entails dignity, equality, a fair income and safe working conditions. 
In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, along with the right to safe workplaces, health workers have duties and 
responsibilities regarding the protection of health and safety at work under international labour standards (52), and to 
follow WHO recommendations for patient safety (53). These include:
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-12-
• following established occupational safety and health procedures, avoiding exposing themselves or others to 
health and safety risks and participating in employer-provided occupational safety and health training;
• using provided protocols to assess, triage and treat patients;
• swiftly following established public health reporting procedures for suspected and confirmed cases;
• treating patients with respect and compassion, conferring dignity and maintaining patient confidentiality;
• providing or reinforcing accurate IPC and public health information to patients and the public;
• putting on, using, taking off and disposing of PPE correctly;
• self-monitoring for signs and symptoms of COVID-19, and reporting any unprotected occupational and nonoccupational exposure to SARS-CoV-2 to the focal point for occupational health or the occupational health 
service, and self-quarantining;
• advising the occupational health service if they are experiencing signs of undue stress or mental health 
challenges that may require supportive interventions;
• reporting to their immediate supervisor any situation they have reasonable justification to believe presents an 
imminent and serious danger to life or health.
Responsibilities of national authorities
Besides their duties and responsibilities as employers in publicly provided health services, national authorities should 
ensure that all health workers involved in the COVID-19 response, regardless of their employment status and mode of 
practice, have access to coverage for medical care and sickness benefits, including for testing and treatment of COVID19, quarantine and isolation in line with national laws (52).
National authorities must ensure that health workers, especially those at medium, high and very high risk of infection,
regardless of their mode of practice, have early access to COVID-19 vaccination programmes (13). They should also 
ensure that all health workers are covered by schemes for employment injury benefits according to national regulations 
(54). National authorities should ensure and facilitate access to medical care for health workers infected with COVID19.
COVID-19, if contracted as a result of work, could be considered as a work or employment injury (54). Such cases 
should be investigated and reported to the public authority responsible for managing employment injury benefits
according to national regulations. Countries should consider updating their lists of occupational diseases, exposure 
criteria and reporting in the context of COVID-19 (55).
Health workers who are infected by COVID-19 as a result of their work – and in case the infection is considered an 
occupational disease or injury in line with national law – should be entitled to health care, and to the extent that they are 
incapacitated for work, cash benefits or compensation. Dependent family members of health workers who die from 
COVID-19 contracted in the course of work-related activities, should be entitled to cash benefits or compensation as 
well as to a funeral grant or benefit (52).
References
1. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak: rights, roles and responsibilities of health workers, including key 
considerations for occupational safety and health. Interim guidance, 18 March 2020. Geneva: World Health 
Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/coronavirus-disease-(covid-19)-outbreak-rights-roles-andresponsibilities-of-health-workers-including-key-considerations-for-occupational-safety-and-health, accessed 
20 November 2020).
2. Prevention, identification and management of health worker infection in the context of COVID-19. Interim 
guidance, 30 October 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/10665-
336265, accessed 20 November 2020).
3. Health workforce policy and management in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic response. Interim guidance,
3 December 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/healthworkforce-policy-and-management-in-the-context-of-the-covid-19-pandemic-response, accessed 10 December 
2020).
4. WHO calls for healthy, safe and decent working conditions for all health workers, amidst COVID-19 pandemic. 
Geneva: World Health Organization; 28 April 2020 (https://www.who.int/news/item/28-04-2020-who-calls-forhealthy-safe-and-decent-working-conditions-for-all-health-workers-amidst-covid-19-pandemic, accessed 20 
November 2020).
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-13-
5. ILO Policy Brief on COVID-19. Pillar 3: Protecting workers in the workplace. Geneva: International Labour 
Organization; 2020 (https://www.ilo.org/global/topics/coronavirus/impacts-and-responses/WCMS_739049/lang--
en/index.htm, accessed 20 November 2020).
6. Mask use in the context of COVID-19. Interim guidance, 1 December 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization 
(https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/337199, accessed 20 December 2020).
7. Chou R, Dana T, Buckley DI, Selph S, Fu Rongwei, Totten AM. Epidemiology of and risk factors for coronavirus 
infection in health care workers: A living rapid review. Ann Intern Med. 2020 Jul 21;173(2):120-136. 
https://doi.org/10.7326/M20-1632. Epub 2020 May 5. PMID: 32369541; PMCID: PMC7240841.
8. Critical preparedness, readiness and response actions for COVID-19. Interim guidance, 4 November 2020. 
Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/critical-preparedness-readiness-andresponse-actions-for-covid-19, accessed 20 November 2020).
9. Considerations for public health and social measures in the workplace in the context of COVID-19. Annex to:
Considerations in adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 10 May 2020 (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/considerations-for-public-health-and-socialmeasures-in-the-workplace-in-the-context-of-covid-19, accessed 20 November 2020).
10. Guidance on preparing workplaces for COVID-19. Washington DC: Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration, U.S. Department of Labor; 2020 (https://www.osha.gov/Publications/OSHA3990.pdf, accessed 
20 November 2020).
11. Infection prevention and control during health care when coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is suspected or 
confirmed. Interim guidance, 29 June 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization 
(https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-2019-nCoV-IPC-2020.4 accessed 20 November 2020).
12. Rational use of personal protective equipment for coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and considerations during 
severe shortages. Interim guidance, 23 December 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization 
(https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/rational-use-of-personal-protective-equipment-for-coronavirus-disease-
(covid-19)-and-considerations-during-severe-shortages, accessed 29 December 2020).
13. Guidance on developing a national deployment and vaccination plan for COVID-19 vaccines. Interim guidance,
16 November 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization 
(https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/336603/WHO-2019-nCoV-Vaccine_deployment-2020.1-
eng.pdf, accessed 20 November 2020).
14. Clinical management of COVID-19. Interim guidance, 27 May 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization 
(https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/clinical-management-of-severe-acute-respiratory-infection-when-novelcoronavirus-(ncov)-infection-is-suspected, accessed 20 November 2020).
15. COVID-19: Recommendations for heating, ventilation, and air conditioning in health care facilities. Washington 
DC: Pan American Health Organization; 21 May 2020 (https://www.paho.org/en/documents/covid-19-
recommendations-heating-ventilation-and-air-conditioning-health-care-facilities, accessed 20 November 2020).
16. ILO sectoral brief: COVID-19 and the health sector. Geneva: International Labour Organization; 11 April 2020
(https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_dialogue/---sector/documents/briefingnote/wcms_741655.pdf,
accessed 20 November 2020).
17. Risk assessment and management of exposure of health care workers in the context of COVID-19. Interim 
guidance, 19 March 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/331496,
accessed 20 November 2020).
18. Minimum requirements for infection prevention and control programmes. Geneva: World Health Organization;
2019 (https://www.who.int/infection-prevention/publications/MinReq-Manual_2019.pdf?ua=1, accessed 20 
November 2020).
19. Infection prevention and control health-care facility response for COVID-19: A module from the suite of health 
service capacity assessments in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. Interim guidance, 20 October 2020. 
Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-2019-nCoVHCF_assessment-IPC-2020.1, accessed 20 November 2020).
20. Liberati EG, Peerally MF, Dixon-Woods M. Learning from high risk industries may not be straightforward: a 
qualitative study of the hierarchy of risk controls approach in healthcare. International Journal for Quality in 
Health Care. 2018 Feb;30(1):39-43. https://doi.org/10.1093/intqhc/mzx163 
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-14-
21. Severe acute respiratory infections treatment centre: practical manual to set up and manage a SARI treatment 
centre and a SARI screening facility in health care facilities. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020 
(https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/331603, accessed 20 November 2020).
22. Cleaning and disinfection of environmental surfaces in the context of COVID-19. Interim guidance, 16 May 2020. 
Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/cleaning-and-disinfection-ofenvironmental-surfaces-inthe-context-of-covid-19, accessed 20 November 2020).
23. Ensuring a safe environment for patients and staff in COVID-19 health-care facilities: A module from the suite of 
health service capacity assessments in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. Interim guidance, 20 October 
2020. Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-2019-nCoVHCF_assessment-Safe_environment-2020.1, accessed 20 November 2020).
24. Administrative controls to guarantee implementation of infection prevention and control measures in the context 
of COVID-19. Washington DC: Pan American Health Organization; 18 June 2020 
(https://iris.paho.org/handle/10665.2/52389, accessed 20 November 2020).
25. Technical specifications of personal protective equipment for COVID-19. Interim guidance, 13 November 2020. 
Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-2019-nCoVPPE_specifications-2020.1, accessed 20 November 2020).
26. Infection control standard precautions in health care: aide memoire. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2006 
(https://www.who.int/csr/resources/publications/4EPR_AM2.pdf, accessed 20 November 2020).
27. Table 4: Summary of WHO position papers – Immunization of health care workers. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; September 2020 (https://www.who.int/immunization/policy/Immunization_routine_table4.pdf,
accessed 20 November 2020).
28. How to implement seasonal influenza vaccination of health workers. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2019 
(https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/325906/9789241515597-eng.pdf?ua=1, accessed 20 November 
2020).
29. MacGibeny MA, Wassef C. Preventing adverse cutaneous reactions from amplified hygiene practices during the 
COVID-19 pandemic: how dermatologists can help through anticipatory guidance. Arch Dermatol Res. (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00403-020-02086-x
30. Yan Y, Chen H, Chen L, Cheng B, Diao P, Dong L, et al. Consensus of Chinese experts on protection of skin and 
mucous membrane barrier for health-care workers fighting against coronavirus disease 2019. Dermatologic 
Therapy. 2020 Jul;33(4):e13310. https://doi.org/10.1111/dth.13310.
31. Gefen A, Ousey K. Update to device-related pressure ulcers: SECURE prevention. COVID-19, face masks and 
skin damage. Journal of Wound Care. 2020;29(5). https://doi.org/10.12968/jowc.2020.29.5.245.
32. Jacklitsch B, Williams WJ, Musolin K, Coca A, Kim J-H, Turner N. NIOSH criteria for a recommended standard. 
Occupational exposure to heat and hot environments. Revised criteria 2016. Cincinnati, OH, USA: Department of 
Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Institute for Occupational 
Safety and Health (NIOSH); 2016 (https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/2016-106/pdfs/2016-
106.pdf?id=10.26616/NIOSHPUB2016106, accessed 20 November 2020).
33. Occupational safety and health in public health emergencies: a manual for protecting health workers and 
responders. Geneva: World Health Organization and International Labour Organization; 2018 
(https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/occupational-safety-and-health-in-public-health-emergencies-a-manualfor-protecting-health-workers-and-responders, accessed 20 November 2020).
34. Guidelines on decent work in public emergency services. Geneva: International Labour Organization; 2019 
(https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_dialogue/---
sector/documents/normativeinstrument/wcms_626551.pdf, accessed 20 November 2020).
35. Health services. Decent working time for nursing personnel: Critical for worker well-being and quality care: 
policy brief. Geneva: International Labour Organization; 2018 (https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---
ed_dialogue/---sector/documents/publication/wcms_655277.pdf, accessed 20 November 2020).
36. Forgione Paola. New patterns of violence against healthcare in the covid-19 pandemic. BMJ Opinion. 15 May 
2020. (https://blogs.bmj.com/bmj/2020/05/15/new-patterns-of-violence-against-healthcare-in-the-covid-19-
pandemic/, accessed 20 November 2020).
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-15-
37. Attacks on health care in the context of COVID-19. In WHO newsroom [website]. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2020 (https://www.who.int/news-room/feature-stories/detail/attacks-on-health-care-in-the-contextof-covid-19, accessed 20 November 2020).
38. Liu J, Gan Y, Jiang H, Li L, Dwyer R, Lu K, et al. Prevalence of workplace violence against healthcare workers: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Occup Environ Med. 2019 Dec;76(12):927-937. PMID: 31611310.
39. Safe and healthy working environments free from violence and harassment. Geneva: International Labour 
Organization; 2020 (https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_protect/---protrav/---
safework/documents/publication/wcms_751832.pdf, accessed 20 December 2020).
40. Social Stigma associated with COVID-19. A guide to preventing and addressing social stigma. Geneva: 
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, United Nations Children’s Fund and World 
Health Organization; 24 February 2020
(https://www.unicef.org/media/65931/file/Social%20stigma%20associated%20with%20the%20coronavirus%20di
sease%202019%20(COVID-19).pdf, accessed 20 November 2020).
41. Framework guidelines for addressing workplace violence in the health sector. Geneva: International Labour 
Office, International Council of Nurses, World Health Organization, Public Services International; 2002 
(https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_dialogue/---
sector/documents/normativeinstrument/wcms_160908.pdf, accessed 20 November 2020).
42. C190 – Violence and Harassment Convention, 2019 (No.190). In: ILO Normlex [website]. Geneva: International 
Labour Organization
(https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:C190, accessed 
20 December 2020).
43. Kisely S, Warren N, McMahon L, Dalais C, Henry I, Siskind D. Occurrence, prevention, and management of the 
psychological effects of emerging virus outbreaks on healthcare workers: rapid review and meta-analysis. BMJ 
2020;369:m1642. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.m1642
44. Mental health and psychosocial considerations during the COVID-19 outbreak. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 18 March 2020 (https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/mental-healthconsiderations.pdf?sfvrsn=6d3578af_10, accessed 20 November 2020).
45. Addressing mental health and psychosocial aspects of COVID-19 outbreak: interim briefing note, version 1.5. 
Geneva: Inter-Agency Standing Committee; February 2020
(https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/system/files/2020-
11/IASC%20Interim%20Briefing%20Note%20on%20COVID19%20Outbreak%20Readiness%20and%20Response%20Operations%20-%20MHPSS_3.pdf, accessed 20 
November 2020).
46. Water, sanitation, hygiene, and waste management for SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19. Interim 
guidance, 29 July 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization and United Nations Children’s Fund 
(https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-2019-nCoV-IPC-WASH-2020.4, accessed 20 November 2020).
47. Bearman G, Bryant K, Leekha S, Mayer J, Silvia Munoz-Price L, Murthy R, et al. Expert guidance: Healthcare 
personnel attire in non-operating-room settings. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2014 Feb;35(2):107-121. 
https://doi.org/10.1086/675066. 
48. Caring for those who care. National programmes for occupational health for health workers. Policy brief. Geneva: 
World Health Organization and International Labour Organization; 2020 
(https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/caring-for-those-who-care, accessed 20 November 2020).
49. C161 − Occupational Health Services Convention, 1985 (No. 161). In: ILO Normlex [website]. Geneva: 
International Labour Organization 
(https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:C161, accessed 
20 November 2020).
50. C155 − Occupational Safety and Health Convention, 1981 (No. 155). In: ILO Normlex [website]. Geneva: 
International Labour Organization 
(https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:C155, accessed 
20 November 2020).
51. R164 − Occupational Safety and Health Recommendation, 1981 (No. 164). In: ILO Normlex [website]. Geneva: 
International Labour Organization 
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-16-
(https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:R164, accessed 
20 November 2020).
52. ILO Standards and COVID-19 (coronavirus). FAQ. Geneva: International Labour Organization; 29 May 2020 
(https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_norm/---
normes/documents/genericdocument/wcms_739937.pdf, accessed 20 November 2020).
53. Health worker safety: a priority for patient safety. Charter: World Patient Safety Day, 17 September 2020. 
Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/world-patient-safety-day/healthworker-safety-charter-wpsd-17-september-2020-3-1.pdf?sfvrsn=2cb6752d_2, accessed 20 November 2020).
54. C121 – Employment Injury Benefits Convention, 1964 [Schedule I amended in 1980] (No.121). In: Normlex 
[website]. Geneva: International Labour Organization 
(https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:C121, accessed 
24 January 2021).
55. ILO List of Occupational Diseases (revised 2010). Geneva: International Labour Organization; 2010 
(https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_protect/---protrav/---
safework/documents/publication/wcms_125137.pdf, accessed 24 January 2021).
Acknowledgements
The following experts participated in the development of this document.
WHO Secretariat: Rola Al-Emam, Benedetta Allegranzi, Yonah (Eric) Amster, Gwen Brachman, Alessandro 
Cassini, Giorgio Cometto, Shalini Desai, Neelam Dhingra-Kumar, Ivan D. Ivanov, Dorota Jarosinska, Catherine Kane, 
Berit Kieselbach, Aiysha Malik, Guy Mbayo, Madison Moon, Maria Neira, Lesley Onyon, Gene Peralta, Julietta 
Rodriguez-Guzman, Alice Simniceanu, Victoria Willet. 
ILO: Magdalena Bober, Halim Hamzaoui, Maren Hopfe, Ursula Kulke, Franklin Muchiri, Joaquim Pintado Nunes, 
Christiane Wiskow.
External Guideline Development Group: Gehad Abo El-Lata, Cairo University, Egypt; Baba Aye, Public Services 
International, France; Claudio Colosio, University of Milano, Italy; John Conly, University of Calgary, Canada; 
Samuel Harvey, Black Dog Institute, Australia; Maria Clara Padoveze, University of São Paulo, Brazil; Fiona Potter, 
Institution of Occupational Safety and Health, United Kingdom; Annalee Yassi, University of British Columbia, 
Canada; Min Zhang, Peking Union Medical College, China. 
WHO and the ILO continue to monitor the situation closely. Should any factors change that may affect this interim 
guidance, WHO and the ILO will issue a further update. Otherwise, this document will expire 2 years after the date of 
publication.
© World Health Organization and International Labour Organization, 2021
Some rights reserved. This work is available under the CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO licence.
WHO reference number: WHO/2019-nCoV/HCW_advice/2021.1
-1-
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health 
workers
Interim guidance
2 February 2021
Introduction
This document is an update of the World Health Organization (WHO) interim guidance, Coronavirus disease (COVID19) outbreak: rights, roles and responsibilities of health workers, including key considerations for occupational safety 
and health, from 18 March 2020 (1). This version, which is based on new and emerging evidence, provides guidance 
on occupational health and safety measures for health workers and occupational health services in the context of the 
COVID-19 pandemic. It also updates the rights and responsibilities for health and safety at work for health workers
according to the standards of the International Labour Organization (ILO).
This document complements and should be used in conjunction with the following WHO interim guidance. Prevention, 
identification and management of health worker infection in the context of COVID-19 from 30 October 2020, which
provides recommendations for post-exposure risk assessment and management of infections in health workers (2), and 
Health workforce policy and management in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic response from 3 December 2020,
which contains strategic policy recommendations for health workforce planning, support and capacity-building (3).
This guidance was developed on the basis of a review of existing WHO and ILO guidance documents, rapid reviews of 
evidence about occupational risks that have been amplified by the COVID-19 pandemic and expert opinion from an 
independent international group of experts. It is intended for employers and health-facility managers, health workers 
and their representatives, occupational health and safety experts, infection prevention and control experts in public and 
private health facilities and policy-makers at national and subnational levels
Key points
• Health workers should continue to enjoy their right to decent, healthy and safe working conditions in 
the context of COVID-19.
• Primary prevention of COVID-19 among health workers should be based on risk assessment and 
introduction of appropriate measures.
• Other occupational risks amplified by the COVID-19 pandemic, including violence, harassment, 
stigma, discrimination, heavy workload and prolonged use of personal protective equipment (PPE) 
should be addressed.
• Occupational health services, mental health and psychosocial support, adequate sanitation, hygiene and 
rest facilities should be provided to all health workers.
• Health-care facilities should have occupational health programmes in conjunction with programmes for 
infection prevention and control.
• Employers have the overall responsibility to ensure that all necessary preventive and protective 
measures are taken to minimize occupational risks to health workers.
• Health workers are responsible for following established rules for the protection of their health and 
safety at work.
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-2-
Background
Health workersi may be exposed to occupational hazards that put them at risk of disease, injury and even death in the 
context of the COVID-19 response. These occupational risks include (a) occupational infections with COVID-19; (b)
skin disorders and heat stress from prolonged use of PPE; (c) exposures to toxins because of increased use of 
disinfectants; (d) psychological distress; (e) chronic fatigue; and (f) stigma, discrimination, physical and psychological 
violence and harassment (4).
Mitigating these hazards and protecting the health, safety and well-being of health workers requires well-coordinated
and comprehensive measures for infection prevention and control, occupational health and safety, health workforce 
management and mental health and psychosocial support (4). Insufficient occupational health and safety measures can 
result in increased rates of work-related illness among health workers, high rates of absenteeism, reduced productivity 
and diminished quality of care (5).
Occupational infections 
Occupational exposure to SARS-CoV-2
The WHO interim guidance Mask use in the context of COVID-19 from 1 December 2020 compiles the available 
evidence on the transmission of SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19 (6). According to this evidence, SARSCoV-2 mainly spreads between people when an infected is in close contact with another person. The virus can spread 
from an infected person’s mouth or nose in small liquid particles ranging from larger ‘respiratory droplets’ to smaller 
‘aerosols’ when the person coughs, sneezes, sings, breathes heavily or talks. Close range contact can result in inhalation 
of, or inoculation with, the virus though the mouth, nose or eyes. 
Aerosol transmission can occur in specific situations in which medical procedures that generate aerosols are performed. 
There is inconclusive evidence about aerosol transmission in health-care settings in the absence of aerosol generating 
procedures (6).
There is limited evidence of transmission through fomites (objects or materials that may be contaminated with viable 
virus, such as utensils, furniture, stethoscopes or thermometers) in the immediate environment around an infected person. 
Such transmission may occur through touching the fomites followed by touching the mouth, nose or eyes (6).
There is emerging evidence of transmission in settings outside of medical facilities, such as indoor, crowded, and 
inadequately ventilated spaces, where infected persons spend long periods of time with others. This suggests the 
possibility of aerosol transmission in addition to droplet and fomite transmission (6).
Health workers’ occupational exposure to SARS-CoV-2 can occur any time in health-care facilities and in the 
community, during work-related travel to an area with local community transmission and on the way to and from the 
workplace. A systematic review suggests that occupational risk for health workers can increase in certain clinical settings 
or with suboptimal hand hygiene, long working hours, or improper or suboptimal use or non-availability of PPE (7).
Workplace risk assessment for SARS-CoV-2
The potential for health workers’ occupational exposure to SARS-CoV-2 can be determined by the likelihood of coming 
into direct, indirect or close contact with a person infected with the virus. This includes direct physical contact or care, 
contact with contaminated surfaces and objects, through aerosol-generating procedures on patients with COVID-19
without adequate personal protection, or working with infected people in indoor, crowded places with inadequate 
ventilation (6). The risk of occupational exposure increases with the level of community transmission of SARS-CoV-2
(8).
Employers, in consultation with health workers and their representatives, and with support from experts in infection 
prevention and control (IPC) and occupational health, should carry out and regularly update a workplace risk assessment 
for SARS-CoV-2. The purpose is to determine the level of risk for potential occupational exposure related to different 
jobs, work tasks and work settings; and to plan and implement adequate measures for risk prevention and mitigation
and for assessing the fitness for work, and return to work, of individual health workers (9).
i Health workers are all people engaged in work actions whose primary intent is to improve health. This includes health service providers, such 
as doctors, nurses, midwives, public health professionals, lab-, health- and medical and non-medical technicians, personal care workers, 
community health workers, healers and some practitioners of traditional medicine. It also includes health management and support workers, such 
as cleaners, drivers, hospital administrators, district health managers and social workers, and other occupational groups in health-related 
activities. Health workers include not only those who work in acute care facilities but also those employed in long-term care, public health, 
community-based care, social care and home care and other occupations in the health and social work sectors as defined by the International 
Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic Activities (ISIC), revision 4, section Q: Human health and social work activities.
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-3-
The following workplace risk levels may be useful for employers and occupational health services when carrying out 
rapid risk assessments for potential occupational exposureii to SARS-CoV-2 for different jobs or tasks (10).
1. Lower risk − jobs or tasks without frequent, close contact with the public or others and that do not require contact 
with people known or suspected of being infected with SARS-CoV-2 (9).
2. Medium risk − jobs or tasks with close frequent contact with patients, visitors, suppliers and co-workers but that do 
not require contact with people known or suspected of being infected with SARS-CoV-2 (8).
3. High risk − jobs or tasks with high potential for close contact with people who are known to be or suspected of 
being infected with SARS-CoV-2 or contact with objects and surfaces possibly contaminated with the virus (9).
4. Very high risk − jobs and tasks with risk of exposure to aerosols containing SARS-CoV-2, in settings where aerosolgenerating procedures are regularly performed on patients with COVID-19 or working with infected people in 
indoor, crowded places without adequate ventilation (6).
Levels of workplace risk, even in the same work setting, may vary based on health worker tasks and roles. Therefore, a 
workplace risk assessment should be carried out for each specific setting, as well as for each role, task or set of tasks. 
The risk assessment should lead to prevention and mitigation measures to avoid exposure based on the level of risk, 
bearing in mind the local epidemiological situation, the specificity of the work setting and work tasks, the hierarchy of 
controls and the level of adherence to IPC measures (11, 12). The above-mentioned workplace risk levels can also be 
useful to identify priority groups as COVID-19 vaccine deployment is planned (13).
Table 1 gives examples of job tasks and measures for prevention and mitigation of health worker exposure to SARSCoV-2 based on risk level, in accordance with the WHO guidance and recommendations for IPC and occupational health 
in the context of COVID-19 (6, 9, 11, 12, 14, 15).
Table 1. Workplace risk levels, job tasks and corresponding measures for primary prevention and mitigation of 
occupational exposure to SARS-CoV-2 among health workers
Risk level Examples of job tasks Sample prevention and mitigation measuresiii
Lower risk
(caution) 
Administrative tasks that do not 
involve contact with patients and
visitors or close contact with other 
co-workers. For example, 
telehealth services, remote 
interviewing of suspected or 
confirmed COVID-19 patients or 
their contacts, working in 
individual or low-density offices.
Health facilities:
• organize remote work and teleservices, wherever possible 
and appropriate;
• provide natural or mechanical ventilation without 
recirculation;
• organize regular environmental clean-up and disinfection;
• introduce measures for avoiding crowding and social 
mixing and encourage workers to observe safe physical 
distancing;
• introduce measures preventing the sharing of work stations 
and equipment;
• establish flexible sick leave policies.
Workers:
• stay home if unwell;
• observe hand and respiratory hygiene;
• use fabric masks in common areas and face-to-face 
meetings.
ii In these risk levels, persons referred to as “known to be or suspected of being infected with SARS-CoV-2” may include pre-symptomatic or 
asymptomatic persons who may be infected but do not have obvious signs or symptoms.
iii For details see the following WHO interim guidance documents: Considerations for public health and social measures in the workplace in the 
context of COVID-19, 10 May 2020 (9); Infection prevention and control during health care when coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is suspected 
or confirmed, 29 June 2020 (11); Rational use of personal protective equipment for coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and considerations during 
severe shortages, 23 December 2020 (12); Clinical management of COVID-19, 27 May 2020 (14); COVID-19: Recommendations for heating, 
ventilation, and air conditioning in health care facilities, 21 May 2020 (15); Mask use in the context of COVID-19, 1 December 2020 (6).
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-4-
Risk level Examples of job tasks Sample prevention and mitigation measuresiii
Medium 
risk 
Jobs or tasks with close frequent 
contact with patients, visitors, 
suppliers and co-workers but that 
do not require contact with people 
known or suspected of being 
infected with SARS-CoV-2. In 
settings with known or suspected 
community transmission of 
SARS-CoV-2, this risk level may 
apply to workers who have 
frequent and close work-related 
contact with other people within a 
health-care facility or in the 
community where safe physical 
distance may be difficult to 
maintain. In settings without 
community transmission, this 
scenario may include close 
frequent contact with people 
coming from areas with known or 
suspected community 
transmission.
Health facilities:
• consider alternatives to face-to-face outpatient visits using 
telehealth services wherever feasible and appropriate;
• provide sneeze screens, barriers, workplace modifications
and natural or mechanical ventilation without recirculation;
• organize screening and triage for early recognition of 
patients with suspected COVID-19 and rapid 
implementation of source control measures;
• organize regular environmental clean-up and disinfection;
• introduce measures to avoid crowding and social mixing,
such as restricting visitors and designating areas where 
patients are not allowed;
• encourage workers to observe safe physical distancing 
when not wearing PPE (e.g. in break rooms and cafeterias);
• provide IPC training and adequate PPE in sufficient 
quantity and quality;
• establish flexible sick leave policies.
Workers:
• stay home if unwell;
• observe hand and respiratory hygiene;
• wear medical masks and other PPE according to their tasks 
and apply standard precautions in providing patient care.
Patients, visitors and suppliers:
• observe hand and respiratory hygiene;
• in settings with community or cluster transmission, wear 
medical or fabric masks.
High risk Clinical triage with in-person 
interviewing of patients with signs 
and symptoms of COVID-19;
cleaning areas for screening and 
isolation; entering rooms or 
isolation areas occupied by 
patients with known or suspected 
COVID-19; conducting a physical 
examination and providing direct 
care not involving aerosolgenerating procedures for patients
with known or suspected COVID19; manipulation of respiratory 
samples; handling respiratory 
secretions, saliva or waste from 
COVID-19 patients;
transportation of people known or 
suspected of having COVID-19 
without physical separation 
between the driver and the 
passenger; cleaning between 
transports of patients with 
suspected COVID-19.
Health facilities:
• implement engineering, environmental and administrative 
controls for IPC, and provide adequate PPE in sufficient 
quantity and quality;
• provide enhanced ventilation without recirculation, with 
“clean to less clean” directional design for airflows;
• organize regular environmental clean-up and disinfection;
• introduce measures for avoiding crowding and social 
mixing and restricting non-essential workers and visitors;
• provide regular IPC training, including on the use of PPE;
• establish flexible sick leave policies.
Workers and caregivers:
• use PPE based on transmission-based precautions (medical 
mask, gown, gloves, eye protection) and apply standard 
precautions in providing patient care;
• stay home if unwell;
• observe hand and respiratory hygiene.
Patients, visitors and suppliers:
• wear medical or fabric masks;
• observe hand and respiratory hygiene.
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-5-
Risk level Examples of job tasks Sample prevention and mitigation measuresiii
Very high 
risk 
Work with COVID-19 patients 
where aerosol-generating 
procedures (e.g. tracheal 
intubation, non-invasive 
ventilation, tracheotomy, 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation, 
manual ventilation before 
intubation, sputum induction, 
bronchoscopy, autopsy 
procedures, dental procedures that 
use spray-generating equipment)
are frequently performed; work 
with infected people in indoor, 
crowded places without adequate 
ventilation.
Health facilities:
• implement engineering, environmental and administrative 
controls for IPC and provide adequate PPE in sufficient 
quantity and quality;
• provide mechanical ventilation with high efficiency 
particulate air (HEPA) filters without recirculation;
• introduce measures for avoiding crowding and social 
mixing and for restricting access of non-essential workers
and visitors;
• provide regular IPC training, and training in donning and 
doffing PPE;
• establish flexible sick leave policies.
Workers:
• stay home if unwell;
• observe hand and respiratory hygiene;
• use PPE (respirator N95 or FFP2 or FFP3, gown, gloves, 
eye protection, apron) and apply standard precautions in 
providing patient care.
IPC: infection prevention and control; PPE: personal protective equipment.
Transparent and timely dissemination of information on the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in health facilities and in the 
community should be an integral part of primary prevention in all risk categories.
Some health workers may be at higher risk of developing severe COVID-19 illness because of older age, pre-existing 
medical conditions or pregnancy (14). Such workers should not be required to carry out tasks with medium, high or very 
high risk levels in accordance with WHO recommendations (3).
Some health workers, especially those who are students, volunteers, interns, newly-graduated or are returning to the 
workplace after time away, may be at greater individual risk because they are unfamiliar with IPC procedures or make
errors while practising newly acquired skills. Appropriate task delegation and role assignment should be considered, 
with provisions for regular supportive supervision in line with WHO and ILO recommendations (3, 16).
All health facilities should consult with experts to assess the effectiveness of their ventilation systems. Any decision on 
whether to use natural, hybrid (mixed-mode) or mechanical ventilation should consider: the climate, including prevalent 
wind direction; the floor plan; and, the need for and cost of the ventilation system (15). Aerosol-generating procedures 
should be performed in rooms with appropriate special air exchange capacities and considerations (11).
Health workers should be encouraged to report if they have had occupational or non-occupational exposure to COVID19 without adequate protection. Such exposures should be investigated, assessed and managed case by case using the 
WHO recommended protocol (17). Follow-up actions for managing the infection and return to work should be decided 
in line with WHO recommendations for prevention, identification and management of health worker infections (2).
Other occupational infections 
While providing care to COVID-19 patients and delivering essential health services, health workers may be exposed to 
other infectious hazards, such as bloodborne pathogens and tuberculosis. Therefore, the prevention and control of 
occupational infections among health workers requires a comprehensive approach, bearing in mind the hierarchy of 
controls and close collaboration between occupational health services and IPC programmes staffed with trained 
professionals (2, 18, 19).Box 1 sets out the hierarchy of hazard controls to prevent occupational infections.
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-6-
Box 1. Hierarchy of hazard controls to prevent occupational infections
Measures for the prevention of occupational infections should aim to align with the hierarchy of controls commonly 
used for preventing exposures to occupational hazards. The hierarchy of controls gives priority to highly effective 
measures, such as protection of all workers through engineering and administrative control, instead of relying only 
on measures dependent on individual behaviour, such as adherence to personal protection (20).
a) Hazard elimination. Eliminating exposure to the infectious hazard in the working environment is the most 
effective control. This may be through working remotely, provision of telehealth services from individual 
offices or teleconferencing. 
b) Engineering/environmental controls. If the hazard cannot be eliminated from the workplace, measures 
should be taken to avoid or reduce the spread of the pathogen and its concentration in the work 
environment. For example, through adapted structural design conducive to patient flow and spatial 
separation for isolating patients, and design and repurposing of wards (11, 21). Adequate ventilation, 
sanitation practices and infrastructure, ‘touch-free’ technology, sneeze guards and barriers, safer needle 
devices and safe health-care waste management are other critical elements (22, 23).
c) Administrative controls. Measures may need to be taken to change the way people work such as: restricting 
workplace access to essential workers with specific training and skills for protection; ensuring appropriate 
working hours; rostering and, where possible, avoiding workers being shifted from high to low transmission 
settings. 
Other helpful controls include the addition of surge personnel to meet work demands; rest breaks; time off 
between shifts; appropriate task delegation; supportive supervision; ‘just-in-time’ and refresher training on 
IPC practices; procedures for monitoring performance and giving feedback (24); paid sick and holiday 
leave; and, policies for workers to stay home if unwell, or in self-quarantine and self-isolation, without loss 
of income.
d) Optimal use of PPE. Measures should be in place to protect individual health workers from exposure, 
including provision of adequate and appropriately fitted PPE based on risk assessment, the type of 
procedure to be performed and the risk of infection during a procedure. Appropriate training and 
monitoring on proper use and disposal of PPE is also important (12). The PPE used for protection against 
occupational infections should comply with standard technical specifications (25).
In all patient care settings, standard precautions should be applied to reduce the risk of transmission of bloodborne and 
other pathogens from both recognized and unrecognized sources in accordance with WHO recommendations (26).
During the COVID-19 pandemic, health workers should continue to receive recommended vaccinations as specified in 
the national immunization programme and WHO recommendations (27). WHO also recommends that health workers 
be encouraged to take a seasonal influenza vaccine (28).
Prolonged use of PPE
In principle, PPE is intended to be used for short periods of time when the exposure to hazard cannot be avoided or 
otherwise controlled. In the context of COVID-19, heavy workload, patient flows and shortages of PPE may require 
health workers to wear PPE for extended periods of time. 
Research suggests that prolonged use of gloves and frequent hand hygiene may cause or aggravate existing hand eczema
(29). If a health worker has a latex allergy, use of non-latex or nitrile gloves is advised. Frequent application of 
moisturizing creams is a good practice to decrease hand irritation. Products containing petroleum can damage the 
integrity of latex gloves and should be avoided for skin care (30). Health workers with sustained rashes or inflammatory 
skin symptoms should be referred to medical care.
There is evidence that prolonged use of PPE for respiratory and eye protection (masks, respirators and goggles) can also 
cause skin damage: itching, rash, acne, pressure injury, contact dermatitis, urticaria and aggravation of pre-existing skin 
diseases(31). To decrease the risk of skin damage, it is a good practice to provide health workers with properly fitted 
PPE, to avoid sustained friction or pressure on the same site; to apply moisturizers or gel before wearing facial protective 
equipment to lubricate and reduce friction between skin and masks or goggles; and to avoid using over-tight goggles,
which can damage the skin and generate fogging (31).
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-7-
Prolonged use of full PPE (gowns, masks, head coverings, coveralls) traps heat and sweat, limits evaporative cooling of 
the body and can lead to heat stress (heat rash, muscle cramps, fainting, exhaustion, breakdown of skeletal muscle and 
heat stroke) (32). Coveralls, double layering of gowns, shoe protection, or hoods that cover the head and neck such as 
those used in the context of filovirus disease outbreaks (e.g. Ebola virus), are not required when caring for patients with 
COVID-19 (12).
WHO and the ILO recommend that health workers at risk of heat stress should be advised to monitor for symptoms of 
heat-related illness, including monitoring the colour and volume of urine output (33). The time spent in full PPE should 
be limited and rest should be arranged in a cool area. Sufficient safe and cool drinking-water should be provided to all 
health workers. 
Use of disinfectants
The increased use of disinfectants in health facilities and in public places may cause toxic effects among health workers, 
cleaners and sanitation workers. Nasal and eye irritation, chest tightness, wheezing, difficulty breathing, and skin 
irritation may result. Disinfectant solutions must be prepared and used according to the manufacturer’s 
recommendations in well-ventilated areas, avoiding mixing of different disinfectants. 
Health workers involved in the preparation and application of disinfectants should be evaluated for medical 
contraindications, trained in the safe use of disinfectants, provided with adequate PPE and instructed in its proper use. 
WHO does not recommend spraying individuals with disinfectants (such as in a tunnel, cabinet or chamber) under any 
circumstances (22).
Workload, work time and work organization
During the COVID-19 pandemic, health workers may be working long hours with heavier workloads and insufficient 
time for rest and recuperation. These demands can result in chronic fatigue and lack of energy, with decreased alertness, 
coordination and efficiency; increased reaction time; impaired cognition and emotional blunting or mood changes. 
Strategic health-workforce planning, support and capacity-building are required to ensure safe staffing levels, fair 
allocation of workloads, and management of working time and work organization according to recommendations in the 
WHO interim guidance, Health workforce policy and management in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic response,
from 3 December 2020 (3).
In the case of a declared public emergency, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, exceptions to the provisions on normal 
working hours should be authorized only temporarily in accordance with ILO recommendations (34). Measures should 
be taken for the optimal organization of working hours, shifts and rests, as practically feasible, based on the local 
situation (Box 2).
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-8-
Box 2. WHO and ILO recommendations for prevention of fatigue during an emergency situation
Shift lengths. Five 8-hour shifts, or four 10-hour shifts, per week are usually tolerable. Longer shifts represent a risk 
factor for fatigue. Depending on the workload, 12-hour days may require more frequent interspersed rest days. 
During the evening and night, shorter shifts (e.g. eight hours) are better tolerated than longer shifts. Fatigue is 
intensified by night work because of night-time drowsiness and inadequate daytime sleep (33). Preference should be 
given to shift rotation in a forward direction (morning to afternoon to night), bearing in mind workers’ preferences 
and local conditions (35).
Workload. Balance shifts of lighter and heavier work tasks. Examine work demands with respect to shift length. 
Twelve-hour shifts are more tolerable for ‘lighter’ tasks (e.g. desk work). Shorter work shifts help counteract 
fatigue from highly intense work, physical exertion, extreme environments or exposure to other health or safety
hazards(33).
Rest and recuperation. Establish policies regarding duration of working hours and rest breaks (e.g. at least 10 
consecutive hours per day of protected time off to obtain 7−8 hours of sleep, and 48 hours off after 14 
consecutive days of work). Providing frequent brief rest breaks (e.g. every 1−2 hours) during demanding work is
more effective against fatigue than a few longer breaks. Allow longer breaks for meals. Plan one or two full days of 
rest to follow five consecutive 8-hour shifts or four 10-hour shifts. Consider two rest days after three consecutive 
12-hour shifts (33).
As necessary, and if possible, provide accommodation for health workers during emergency operations with access 
to food services or ready-to-eat meals, sanitary facilities and recreational opportunities, while maintaining physical 
distancing and other public health measures to prevent COVID-19 (33).
Violence, harassment, discrimination and stigma
Incidents of violence and harassmentiv against health workers have been increasing during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
The most widespread risk factors for workplace violence in the health sector include stress and fatigue, long patient 
waiting times, crowding, the burden of transmitting negative prognoses, COVID-19-specific prevention and control 
measures (such as placing individuals in quarantine or isolation facilities), contact tracing or not allowing access to the 
bodies of deceased loved ones. These can all lead to additional tensions and violence (36).
Because of their proximity to potentially infected people, health workers may also be seen as infection threats within 
the community and thus face stigma and discrimination. Health workers are at risk of violence and harassment at the 
workplace as well as on their way to and from work and in the community (37). Wearing work clothes, or other signs 
that make health workers easy to identify, may increase the risk of experiencing stigma, discrimination or violence and 
harassment by the public (37).
Workplace violence and harassment has been shown to have negative effects on the organization of health services and 
retainment of staff, the mental and physical well-being of health practitioners and the quality of health-care delivery. A 
systematic review (38) found that health workers in service delivery roles, such as nurses, first responders, emergency 
room staff and physicians, and those working long hours or night shifts, are at higher risk. Male providers are slightly 
more likely to become victims of physical violence, while female providers have a higher risk of exposure to sexual 
harassment and sexual violence. Health workers from ethnic minorities and other minority groups might be particularly 
at risk.
Violence, harassment, discrimination and stigma against health workers should be prevented and eliminated as much as 
possible. Some countries have introduced specific legislation, for example by criminalizing such acts and providing
regulatory protection for health workers, to prevent and eliminate violence and harassment and retaliation against health 
workers (39). National governments and local authorities can adopt community-engagement and communication 
initiatives and behavioural standards, to prevent stigmatization of health workers at the workplace and in the community 
thereby promoting public respect and recognition of the role of health workers (40). Box 3 sets out international 
recommendations for addressing this issue.
iv The Violence and Harassment Convention, 2019 (No. 190) defines “violence and harassment” in the world of work as “a range of 
unacceptable behaviours and practices, or threats thereof, whether a single occurrence or repeated, that aim at, result in, or are likely to result in 
physical, psychological, sexual or economic harm, and includes gender-based violence and harassment”. The Convention also establishes the 
responsibilities of national authorities and employers respectively.
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-9-
Box 3. International recommendations for addressing workplace violence and harassment in the health 
sector (41, 42)
• Design, implement and monitor a workplace policy to prevent and combat violence, harassment, 
discrimination and stigma with the participation of workers and their representatives, and ensure that all 
staff, including management, are aware of it and abide by it.
• Establish procedures to prohibit discrimination and harassment and promote fair treatment of workers.
• Provide security briefings and personnel in high-risk areas.
• Undertake initiatives to raise awareness and provide training on violence and harassment.
• Provide timely and accurate information to staff and patients to reduce uncertainty and distress.
• Streamline patient flow and avoid crowding and waiting times.
• Ensure safe access to and from the workplace and easily-identified emergency exits.
• Provide alarm systems (e.g. panic buttons, telephone, beeper, short-wave radio) where risk is anticipated.
• Have protocols in place for reporting, investigating and responding to incidents of violence, stigma and 
discrimination in a blame-free environment.
• Introduce measures to protect complainants, victims, witnesses and whistle-blowers against victimization or 
retaliation and ensure confidentiality is protected.
• Provide confidential assistance, counselling and support to victims of violence, harassment and stigma. 
• Regularly assess the risk of violence and harassment in consultation with workers and their representatives.
• Avoid wearing uniforms or other clinical attire while commuting to work and when visiting public places, 
households or the community for non-professional reasons.
Mental health and psychosocial support
In addition to the pressures mentioned above, a systematic review (43) found that health workers’ mental health and 
well-being can be affected in the context of COVID-19. This can be caused by contact with affected patients, perceived 
impediments to doing their jobs, insufficient organizational support, forced redeployment to jobs with higher levels of 
risk, lack of confidence in protective measures and working as a nurse.
Personal risk factors for health workers’ mental health include lower levels of education, inadequate training, less 
clinical experience, working as a part-time employee, increased time in quarantine, social isolation, having children at 
home, lower household income, younger age, female sex, comorbid physical health conditions and the impact of the 
pandemic on their personal lifestyle.
Lower perceived personal self-efficacy and a history of psychological distress, mental health disorders or substance 
abuse, are further risk factors. These risks make health workers vulnerable to common mental health conditions 
including anxiety, depression and insomnia (33, 43). Mental health issues can contribute to reduced performance, 
absence, staff resignations or higher turnover, a reduction in efficiency and increased possibility of human error, which 
may pose a threat to both health workers and patient safety (44).
The WHO interim guidance, Health workforce policy and management in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic 
response, from 3 December 2020, specifies interventions to support health workers’ mental health issues at the 
individual level (3). According to international recommendations by WHO and others, the following additional measures 
should be considered for protecting mental health in the workplace.
• Implement surveillance measures to detect critical incidents and mitigate their impact on the mental health of 
health workers (33, 43).
• Ensure that quality communication and accurate information updates are provided to all health workers, and
rotate workers from higher-stress to lower-stress functions (44).
• Partner inexperienced workers with experienced colleagues and ensure that outreach personnel enter the 
community in pairs (45).
• Ensure availability of and facilitate access to confidential mental health and psychosocial support services for 
health workers, including remotely-provided or on-site services (12).
• Provide mechanisms for early and confidential identification and management of anxiety, depression and other 
mental health conditions, and initiate psychosocial support strategies and first-line interventions (12).
• Promote a mental health prevention culture among health workers and health managers (12).
• Ensure health workers who develop mental health conditions and seek help can return to their work without 
stigma or discrimination (45).
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-10-
Sanitation, hygiene and rest facilities
Functioning hand hygiene facilities should be present for all health workers at all points of care: in designated areas 
where PPE is put on or taken off; in toilets and rooms for personal and menstrual hygiene, and where health-care waste 
is handled. Ensure availability of hand-washing facilities with clean running water and hand hygiene products (soap, 
single-use clean towels). Alcohol-based hand rubs containing 60−80% alcohol should be available at all points of care. 
Access to rest and relaxation rooms, safe drinking-water, toilets, supplies for personal and menstrual hygiene, and food 
and rest opportunities should all be available during work shifts (46). These areas should allow for safe physical 
distancing and adequate ventilation (3).
Designated rooms should be set aside for health workers providing toilets and space for personal and menstrual hygiene; 
these should be separate from those used by patients and visitors. There should be a bin for disposal of waste products,
or an area for washing re-usable materials, and a space for women to wash themselves with privacy (3).
There should be daily cleaning protocols to ensure workplace, workstations, equipment and facilities are clean and tidy
and a system for disposing of bin contents and disinfecting the bins (34).
In some situations, the provision of temporary accommodation (hotels/motels, trailers or tents) may be needed between 
shifts for rest and hygiene. Food service, childcare and recreational opportunities can facilitate personnel availability,
decrease exposure to infection in families and the community, and alleviate stress and fatigue (17).
Facilities should be provided at the workplace for health workers to change into and out of work clothing, so they do 
not need to wear it when commuting (46). Professional laundering of work clothes worn at the bedside, that come into
contact with the patient or patient environment, should be organized by the health facility (47).
Occupational health services
Every health-care facility should have an occupational health programme, as articulated in the WHO/ILO global 
framework for occupational health programmes for health workers, and a designated and appropriately trained focal 
point for occupational health and safety (48). Large health-care facilities should have a labour-management committee 
for health and safety at work and an occupational health service with essential preventive functions (49).
In the context of COVID-19, occupational health service focal points should collaborate closely with IPC programmes 
to institute IPC policies and procedures in accordance with the WHO interim guidance, Prevention, identification and 
management of health worker infection in the context of COVID-19, from 30 October 2020 (2). In addition, focal points 
and occupational health services should:
• carry out regular workplace risk assessments for exposure to other risks for health and safety at work amplified 
by the COVID-19 pandemic and assess the effectiveness of preventive measures;
• provide instructions and training to workers on how to work in a healthy and safe way, including prevention of 
violence and stigma, safe use of disinfectants and protection of mental health and psychological well-being;
• advise on additional measures for control and mitigation of other physical, chemical, ergonomic and radiation 
hazards based on risk assessment;
• identify priority groups of health workers for COVID-19 vaccination and other immunizations based on 
workplace risk assessment and medical conditions;
• organize immunization campaigns and recording of vaccination status;
• organize health surveillance of workers engaged in jobs and tasks with an elevated risk of exposure to SARSCoV-2 and other occupational hazards;
• monitor reporting and participate in the investigation of cases of exposure to SARS-CoV-2 and accidental 
exposure to other pathogens, needlesticks and other sharps, accidents and incidents of violence and harassment
and develop measures for prevention;
• advise on the procurement of safer technical devices and adequate PPE;
• organize the monitoring of health workers for COVID-19 symptoms, testing and provision of expert advice to 
health workers on issues related to exposure and their health;
• ensure workers’ representatives are consulted on all aspects of occupational safety and health associated with 
their work to enhance cooperation between management and workers;
• collaborate with facility focal points for infection prevention and control, patient safety and human resources;
• advise on the provision of suitable facilities for health workers to shower and change from work clothing to day 
wear.
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-11-
Health workers should be evaluated confidentially by medical professionals for fitness for duty to carry out certain jobs 
and tasks, and for any impairment that may pose increased risk of illness or injury from exposures at work. In the context 
of COVID-19, certain workers need special consideration. These include:
• older health workers and those with pre-existing medical conditions or who are pregnant and may be at higher 
risk of developing serious illness;
• workers with mental health conditions that can deteriorate from additional distress, such as tending to a high 
number of severely ill and dying patients;
• workers with increased workload, prolonged hours or concern for their own or a family member’s health.
Occupational health services should organize a health assessment for any worker who self-identifies as fitting into one 
of the above categories. An assessment should also be done in the following situations: a change of job, work tasks or 
work setting; before workers are assigned roles with COVID-19 patients; and on resumption of work after a prolonged 
absence for health reasons. Periodic assessments, particularly for the development of skin and mental health disorders 
and other work-related health problems, are advised for all staff.
Duties, rights and responsibilities for health and safety at work
Employer responsibilities
According to international labour standards, employers have the overall responsibility for ensuring that all necessary
preventive and protective measures are taken to minimize occupational risks (50). Keeping this in mind, in the context 
of COVID-19, employers of health workers should:
• consult with health workers and their representatives on the occupational safety and health aspects of their work
and the risks of exposure and adopt adequate preventive and mitigation measures, avoiding the creation of new
sources of risk;
• ensure timely access to information and transparent dialogue between health workers and employers, including
sharing of the most recent information on clinical protocols, guidelines, measures and decisions to ensure 
effective implementation, as well as on workplace situations that expose health workers to risks;
• provide information, instruction and training on occupational safety and health, including refresher training in 
IPC, and the correct use, donning, doffing and disposal of PPE;
• provide adequate IPC and PPE supplies in sufficient quantity and quality and at no cost to any worker;
• maintain supply chain management of PPE supplies;
• provide personnel with timely technical updates on COVID-19 and appropriate tools to assess, triage, test and
treat patients, and share IPC information with patients and the public;
• provide appropriate security measures as needed for personal safety;
• ensure a blame-free environment in which health workers can report on hazardous, stigmatizing or violent 
incidents related to work and adopt measures for immediate follow-up, including support to victims;
• advise health workers on health self-assessment, symptom reporting and policies for staying home if unwell or 
in quarantine;
• maintain appropriate working hours with breaks and rest periods in accordance with national law;
• allow health workers to exercise the right to remove themselves from a work situation that they have reasonable 
justification to believe presents an imminent and serious danger to their life or health, and protect health workers 
exercising this right from any undue consequences;
• notify the competent authority of cases of occupational injuries and diseases, in accordance with national law;
• consider providing access to mental health support and counselling resources;
• promote cooperation between management and health workers and their representatives;
• ensure health workers are covered with employment injury benefits in line with national law.
Whenever two or more employers or entities engage in activities simultaneously in one work setting, they should 
collaborate on occupational safety and health, without prejudice to the responsibility of each for the health and safety 
of its employees (51).
Health worker rights and responsibilities
Health workers are entitled to decent work, which entails dignity, equality, a fair income and safe working conditions. 
In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, along with the right to safe workplaces, health workers have duties and 
responsibilities regarding the protection of health and safety at work under international labour standards (52), and to 
follow WHO recommendations for patient safety (53). These include:
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-12-
• following established occupational safety and health procedures, avoiding exposing themselves or others to 
health and safety risks and participating in employer-provided occupational safety and health training;
• using provided protocols to assess, triage and treat patients;
• swiftly following established public health reporting procedures for suspected and confirmed cases;
• treating patients with respect and compassion, conferring dignity and maintaining patient confidentiality;
• providing or reinforcing accurate IPC and public health information to patients and the public;
• putting on, using, taking off and disposing of PPE correctly;
• self-monitoring for signs and symptoms of COVID-19, and reporting any unprotected occupational and nonoccupational exposure to SARS-CoV-2 to the focal point for occupational health or the occupational health 
service, and self-quarantining;
• advising the occupational health service if they are experiencing signs of undue stress or mental health 
challenges that may require supportive interventions;
• reporting to their immediate supervisor any situation they have reasonable justification to believe presents an 
imminent and serious danger to life or health.
Responsibilities of national authorities
Besides their duties and responsibilities as employers in publicly provided health services, national authorities should 
ensure that all health workers involved in the COVID-19 response, regardless of their employment status and mode of 
practice, have access to coverage for medical care and sickness benefits, including for testing and treatment of COVID19, quarantine and isolation in line with national laws (52).
National authorities must ensure that health workers, especially those at medium, high and very high risk of infection,
regardless of their mode of practice, have early access to COVID-19 vaccination programmes (13). They should also 
ensure that all health workers are covered by schemes for employment injury benefits according to national regulations 
(54). National authorities should ensure and facilitate access to medical care for health workers infected with COVID19.
COVID-19, if contracted as a result of work, could be considered as a work or employment injury (54). Such cases 
should be investigated and reported to the public authority responsible for managing employment injury benefits
according to national regulations. Countries should consider updating their lists of occupational diseases, exposure 
criteria and reporting in the context of COVID-19 (55).
Health workers who are infected by COVID-19 as a result of their work – and in case the infection is considered an 
occupational disease or injury in line with national law – should be entitled to health care, and to the extent that they are 
incapacitated for work, cash benefits or compensation. Dependent family members of health workers who die from 
COVID-19 contracted in the course of work-related activities, should be entitled to cash benefits or compensation as 
well as to a funeral grant or benefit (52).
References
1. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak: rights, roles and responsibilities of health workers, including key 
considerations for occupational safety and health. Interim guidance, 18 March 2020. Geneva: World Health 
Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/coronavirus-disease-(covid-19)-outbreak-rights-roles-andresponsibilities-of-health-workers-including-key-considerations-for-occupational-safety-and-health, accessed 
20 November 2020).
2. Prevention, identification and management of health worker infection in the context of COVID-19. Interim 
guidance, 30 October 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/10665-
336265, accessed 20 November 2020).
3. Health workforce policy and management in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic response. Interim guidance,
3 December 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/healthworkforce-policy-and-management-in-the-context-of-the-covid-19-pandemic-response, accessed 10 December 
2020).
4. WHO calls for healthy, safe and decent working conditions for all health workers, amidst COVID-19 pandemic. 
Geneva: World Health Organization; 28 April 2020 (https://www.who.int/news/item/28-04-2020-who-calls-forhealthy-safe-and-decent-working-conditions-for-all-health-workers-amidst-covid-19-pandemic, accessed 20 
November 2020).
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-13-
5. ILO Policy Brief on COVID-19. Pillar 3: Protecting workers in the workplace. Geneva: International Labour 
Organization; 2020 (https://www.ilo.org/global/topics/coronavirus/impacts-and-responses/WCMS_739049/lang--
en/index.htm, accessed 20 November 2020).
6. Mask use in the context of COVID-19. Interim guidance, 1 December 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization 
(https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/337199, accessed 20 December 2020).
7. Chou R, Dana T, Buckley DI, Selph S, Fu Rongwei, Totten AM. Epidemiology of and risk factors for coronavirus 
infection in health care workers: A living rapid review. Ann Intern Med. 2020 Jul 21;173(2):120-136. 
https://doi.org/10.7326/M20-1632. Epub 2020 May 5. PMID: 32369541; PMCID: PMC7240841.
8. Critical preparedness, readiness and response actions for COVID-19. Interim guidance, 4 November 2020. 
Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/critical-preparedness-readiness-andresponse-actions-for-covid-19, accessed 20 November 2020).
9. Considerations for public health and social measures in the workplace in the context of COVID-19. Annex to:
Considerations in adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 10 May 2020 (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/considerations-for-public-health-and-socialmeasures-in-the-workplace-in-the-context-of-covid-19, accessed 20 November 2020).
10. Guidance on preparing workplaces for COVID-19. Washington DC: Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration, U.S. Department of Labor; 2020 (https://www.osha.gov/Publications/OSHA3990.pdf, accessed 
20 November 2020).
11. Infection prevention and control during health care when coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is suspected or 
confirmed. Interim guidance, 29 June 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization 
(https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-2019-nCoV-IPC-2020.4 accessed 20 November 2020).
12. Rational use of personal protective equipment for coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and considerations during 
severe shortages. Interim guidance, 23 December 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization 
(https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/rational-use-of-personal-protective-equipment-for-coronavirus-disease-
(covid-19)-and-considerations-during-severe-shortages, accessed 29 December 2020).
13. Guidance on developing a national deployment and vaccination plan for COVID-19 vaccines. Interim guidance,
16 November 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization 
(https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/336603/WHO-2019-nCoV-Vaccine_deployment-2020.1-
eng.pdf, accessed 20 November 2020).
14. Clinical management of COVID-19. Interim guidance, 27 May 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization 
(https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/clinical-management-of-severe-acute-respiratory-infection-when-novelcoronavirus-(ncov)-infection-is-suspected, accessed 20 November 2020).
15. COVID-19: Recommendations for heating, ventilation, and air conditioning in health care facilities. Washington 
DC: Pan American Health Organization; 21 May 2020 (https://www.paho.org/en/documents/covid-19-
recommendations-heating-ventilation-and-air-conditioning-health-care-facilities, accessed 20 November 2020).
16. ILO sectoral brief: COVID-19 and the health sector. Geneva: International Labour Organization; 11 April 2020
(https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_dialogue/---sector/documents/briefingnote/wcms_741655.pdf,
accessed 20 November 2020).
17. Risk assessment and management of exposure of health care workers in the context of COVID-19. Interim 
guidance, 19 March 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/331496,
accessed 20 November 2020).
18. Minimum requirements for infection prevention and control programmes. Geneva: World Health Organization;
2019 (https://www.who.int/infection-prevention/publications/MinReq-Manual_2019.pdf?ua=1, accessed 20 
November 2020).
19. Infection prevention and control health-care facility response for COVID-19: A module from the suite of health 
service capacity assessments in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. Interim guidance, 20 October 2020. 
Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-2019-nCoVHCF_assessment-IPC-2020.1, accessed 20 November 2020).
20. Liberati EG, Peerally MF, Dixon-Woods M. Learning from high risk industries may not be straightforward: a 
qualitative study of the hierarchy of risk controls approach in healthcare. International Journal for Quality in 
Health Care. 2018 Feb;30(1):39-43. https://doi.org/10.1093/intqhc/mzx163 
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-14-
21. Severe acute respiratory infections treatment centre: practical manual to set up and manage a SARI treatment 
centre and a SARI screening facility in health care facilities. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020 
(https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/331603, accessed 20 November 2020).
22. Cleaning and disinfection of environmental surfaces in the context of COVID-19. Interim guidance, 16 May 2020. 
Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/cleaning-and-disinfection-ofenvironmental-surfaces-inthe-context-of-covid-19, accessed 20 November 2020).
23. Ensuring a safe environment for patients and staff in COVID-19 health-care facilities: A module from the suite of 
health service capacity assessments in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. Interim guidance, 20 October 
2020. Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-2019-nCoVHCF_assessment-Safe_environment-2020.1, accessed 20 November 2020).
24. Administrative controls to guarantee implementation of infection prevention and control measures in the context 
of COVID-19. Washington DC: Pan American Health Organization; 18 June 2020 
(https://iris.paho.org/handle/10665.2/52389, accessed 20 November 2020).
25. Technical specifications of personal protective equipment for COVID-19. Interim guidance, 13 November 2020. 
Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-2019-nCoVPPE_specifications-2020.1, accessed 20 November 2020).
26. Infection control standard precautions in health care: aide memoire. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2006 
(https://www.who.int/csr/resources/publications/4EPR_AM2.pdf, accessed 20 November 2020).
27. Table 4: Summary of WHO position papers – Immunization of health care workers. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; September 2020 (https://www.who.int/immunization/policy/Immunization_routine_table4.pdf,
accessed 20 November 2020).
28. How to implement seasonal influenza vaccination of health workers. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2019 
(https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/325906/9789241515597-eng.pdf?ua=1, accessed 20 November 
2020).
29. MacGibeny MA, Wassef C. Preventing adverse cutaneous reactions from amplified hygiene practices during the 
COVID-19 pandemic: how dermatologists can help through anticipatory guidance. Arch Dermatol Res. (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00403-020-02086-x
30. Yan Y, Chen H, Chen L, Cheng B, Diao P, Dong L, et al. Consensus of Chinese experts on protection of skin and 
mucous membrane barrier for health-care workers fighting against coronavirus disease 2019. Dermatologic 
Therapy. 2020 Jul;33(4):e13310. https://doi.org/10.1111/dth.13310.
31. Gefen A, Ousey K. Update to device-related pressure ulcers: SECURE prevention. COVID-19, face masks and 
skin damage. Journal of Wound Care. 2020;29(5). https://doi.org/10.12968/jowc.2020.29.5.245.
32. Jacklitsch B, Williams WJ, Musolin K, Coca A, Kim J-H, Turner N. NIOSH criteria for a recommended standard. 
Occupational exposure to heat and hot environments. Revised criteria 2016. Cincinnati, OH, USA: Department of 
Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Institute for Occupational 
Safety and Health (NIOSH); 2016 (https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/2016-106/pdfs/2016-
106.pdf?id=10.26616/NIOSHPUB2016106, accessed 20 November 2020).
33. Occupational safety and health in public health emergencies: a manual for protecting health workers and 
responders. Geneva: World Health Organization and International Labour Organization; 2018 
(https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/occupational-safety-and-health-in-public-health-emergencies-a-manualfor-protecting-health-workers-and-responders, accessed 20 November 2020).
34. Guidelines on decent work in public emergency services. Geneva: International Labour Organization; 2019 
(https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_dialogue/---
sector/documents/normativeinstrument/wcms_626551.pdf, accessed 20 November 2020).
35. Health services. Decent working time for nursing personnel: Critical for worker well-being and quality care: 
policy brief. Geneva: International Labour Organization; 2018 (https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---
ed_dialogue/---sector/documents/publication/wcms_655277.pdf, accessed 20 November 2020).
36. Forgione Paola. New patterns of violence against healthcare in the covid-19 pandemic. BMJ Opinion. 15 May 
2020. (https://blogs.bmj.com/bmj/2020/05/15/new-patterns-of-violence-against-healthcare-in-the-covid-19-
pandemic/, accessed 20 November 2020).
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-15-
37. Attacks on health care in the context of COVID-19. In WHO newsroom [website]. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2020 (https://www.who.int/news-room/feature-stories/detail/attacks-on-health-care-in-the-contextof-covid-19, accessed 20 November 2020).
38. Liu J, Gan Y, Jiang H, Li L, Dwyer R, Lu K, et al. Prevalence of workplace violence against healthcare workers: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Occup Environ Med. 2019 Dec;76(12):927-937. PMID: 31611310.
39. Safe and healthy working environments free from violence and harassment. Geneva: International Labour 
Organization; 2020 (https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_protect/---protrav/---
safework/documents/publication/wcms_751832.pdf, accessed 20 December 2020).
40. Social Stigma associated with COVID-19. A guide to preventing and addressing social stigma. Geneva: 
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, United Nations Children’s Fund and World 
Health Organization; 24 February 2020
(https://www.unicef.org/media/65931/file/Social%20stigma%20associated%20with%20the%20coronavirus%20di
sease%202019%20(COVID-19).pdf, accessed 20 November 2020).
41. Framework guidelines for addressing workplace violence in the health sector. Geneva: International Labour 
Office, International Council of Nurses, World Health Organization, Public Services International; 2002 
(https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_dialogue/---
sector/documents/normativeinstrument/wcms_160908.pdf, accessed 20 November 2020).
42. C190 – Violence and Harassment Convention, 2019 (No.190). In: ILO Normlex [website]. Geneva: International 
Labour Organization
(https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:C190, accessed 
20 December 2020).
43. Kisely S, Warren N, McMahon L, Dalais C, Henry I, Siskind D. Occurrence, prevention, and management of the 
psychological effects of emerging virus outbreaks on healthcare workers: rapid review and meta-analysis. BMJ 
2020;369:m1642. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.m1642
44. Mental health and psychosocial considerations during the COVID-19 outbreak. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 18 March 2020 (https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/mental-healthconsiderations.pdf?sfvrsn=6d3578af_10, accessed 20 November 2020).
45. Addressing mental health and psychosocial aspects of COVID-19 outbreak: interim briefing note, version 1.5. 
Geneva: Inter-Agency Standing Committee; February 2020
(https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/system/files/2020-
11/IASC%20Interim%20Briefing%20Note%20on%20COVID19%20Outbreak%20Readiness%20and%20Response%20Operations%20-%20MHPSS_3.pdf, accessed 20 
November 2020).
46. Water, sanitation, hygiene, and waste management for SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19. Interim 
guidance, 29 July 2020. Geneva: World Health Organization and United Nations Children’s Fund 
(https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-2019-nCoV-IPC-WASH-2020.4, accessed 20 November 2020).
47. Bearman G, Bryant K, Leekha S, Mayer J, Silvia Munoz-Price L, Murthy R, et al. Expert guidance: Healthcare 
personnel attire in non-operating-room settings. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2014 Feb;35(2):107-121. 
https://doi.org/10.1086/675066. 
48. Caring for those who care. National programmes for occupational health for health workers. Policy brief. Geneva: 
World Health Organization and International Labour Organization; 2020 
(https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/caring-for-those-who-care, accessed 20 November 2020).
49. C161 − Occupational Health Services Convention, 1985 (No. 161). In: ILO Normlex [website]. Geneva: 
International Labour Organization 
(https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:C161, accessed 
20 November 2020).
50. C155 − Occupational Safety and Health Convention, 1981 (No. 155). In: ILO Normlex [website]. Geneva: 
International Labour Organization 
(https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:C155, accessed 
20 November 2020).
51. R164 − Occupational Safety and Health Recommendation, 1981 (No. 164). In: ILO Normlex [website]. Geneva: 
International Labour Organization 
COVID-19: Occupational health and safety for health workers. Interim guidance
-16-
(https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:R164, accessed 
20 November 2020).
52. ILO Standards and COVID-19 (coronavirus). FAQ. Geneva: International Labour Organization; 29 May 2020 
(https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_norm/---
normes/documents/genericdocument/wcms_739937.pdf, accessed 20 November 2020).
53. Health worker safety: a priority for patient safety. Charter: World Patient Safety Day, 17 September 2020. 
Geneva: World Health Organization (https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/world-patient-safety-day/healthworker-safety-charter-wpsd-17-september-2020-3-1.pdf?sfvrsn=2cb6752d_2, accessed 20 November 2020).
54. C121 – Employment Injury Benefits Convention, 1964 [Schedule I amended in 1980] (No.121). In: Normlex 
[website]. Geneva: International Labour Organization 
(https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:C121, accessed 
24 January 2021).
55. ILO List of Occupational Diseases (revised 2010). Geneva: International Labour Organization; 2010 
(https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_protect/---protrav/---
safework/documents/publication/wcms_125137.pdf, accessed 24 January 2021).
Acknowledgements
The following experts participated in the development of this document.
WHO Secretariat: Rola Al-Emam, Benedetta Allegranzi, Yonah (Eric) Amster, Gwen Brachman, Alessandro 
Cassini, Giorgio Cometto, Shalini Desai, Neelam Dhingra-Kumar, Ivan D. Ivanov, Dorota Jarosinska, Catherine Kane, 
Berit Kieselbach, Aiysha Malik, Guy Mbayo, Madison Moon, Maria Neira, Lesley Onyon, Gene Peralta, Julietta 
Rodriguez-Guzman, Alice Simniceanu, Victoria Willet. 
ILO: Magdalena Bober, Halim Hamzaoui, Maren Hopfe, Ursula Kulke, Franklin Muchiri, Joaquim Pintado Nunes, 
Christiane Wiskow.
External Guideline Development Group: Gehad Abo El-Lata, Cairo University, Egypt; Baba Aye, Public Services 
International, France; Claudio Colosio, University of Milano, Italy; John Conly, University of Calgary, Canada; 
Samuel Harvey, Black Dog Institute, Australia; Maria Clara Padoveze, University of São Paulo, Brazil; Fiona Potter, 
Institution of Occupational Safety and Health, United Kingdom; Annalee Yassi, University of British Columbia, 
Canada; Min Zhang, Peking Union Medical College, China. 
WHO and the ILO continue to monitor the situation closely. Should any factors change that may affect this interim 
guidance, WHO and the ILO will issue a further update. Otherwise, this document will expire 2 years after the date of 
publication.
© World Health Organization and International Labour Organization, 2021
Some rights reserved. This work is available under the CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO licence.
WHO reference number: WHO/2019-nCoV/HCW_advice/2021.1